Le TREY 
ee, 





ee ee 
se 
vy 


im? 


oe a 
> 


2 
’ 













DUKE 
HOSPITAL 





LIBRARY 


Duke University Medical Center Library 


Historical Collection 





DATE DUE 






C2 3 1094 











FOUR TREATISES 


OF THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 
CALLED PARACELSUS 


PUBLICATIONS OF THE INSTITUTE OF THE HISTORY OF MEDICINE 
THE JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY 


SECOND SERIES: TEXTS AND DOCUMENTS 


VOLUME I 


FOUR TREATISES 
OF THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 
CALLED PARACEESUS 








THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


CALLED PARACELSUS 


Woodcut of 1538 


irschvogel 


H 


in 


by August 


? 


FOUR TREATISES 


OF 


THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 
CALLED PARACELSUS 


Translated from the original German, with Introductory Essays 


BY 
C. LILIAN TEMKIN -: GEORGE ROSEN 
GREGORY ZILBOORG -: HENRY E. SIGERIST 


EDITED, WITH A PREFACE 
BY 
HENRY E. SIGERIST 


BALTIMORE 


THE JOHNS HOPKINS PRESS 
1941 


Ags Wk 
ea 
* ~iTe 
aft F 
an 


Pax) | Aud) N 
a” re a ae os A is: al’ ‘+o is 
* i if A ry i i a 
: CAP ; q ‘ - br he R aie BS i 
* Bi, q 4 = _ De oe 
Cay x r 19% J 10] 
‘ : ms q= 
vs % 
4 
’ : vs 





PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
BY J. H. FURST COMPANY, BALTIMORE, MARYLAND 


7 
sy 4 : 
4 AF 
Ts ae Ai: 


PREFACE 


Four hundred years ago, on September 24, 1541, Paracelsus 
died in Salzburg. He died misunderstood by the world, em- 
bittered, and poor. With him went one of the most forceful 
personalities of the Renaissance. 

Born near Einsiedeln toward the end of the year 1493, 
Philip Theophrastus Bombast von Hohenheim, who later called 
himself Paracelsus, was the son of a physician. His father 
Wilhelm von Hohenheim was the impoverished scion of a 
noble family of Suabia. He had married a Swiss girl and 
practised medicine on the pilgrims’ road that leads to the 
Benedictine Abbey of Einsiedeln. Thus Paracelsus grew up 
in the mountains of Switzerland until the family, in 1502, 
moved to Carinthia where the father had accepted a position 
as municipal physician of the mining town of Villach. 

Paracelsus wanted to be a physician like his father. He 
studied the arts, possibly in Vienna, then medicine in Italy 
at the University of Ferrara. But he was thoroughly dis- 
appointed with the instruction that was given at the time. 
From his father he had learned to see nature with his own 
eyes, not through the medium of books, and he had learned 
much biology with him. In Villach, laboring in mines and 
smelting works, he had acquired a thorough knowledge of 
chemistry. And now, in Italy, he found that there was too 
wide a gap between science and the Graeco-Arabic theories 
that were still the foundation of medicine. He was a rebellious 
spirit, at that time already hard-headed and stubborn. Since 
he could not find at the university the enlightenment he was 
seeking, he looked for other teachers and started on a voyage 
of discovery which, with short interruptions, was to last until 
his death. 

For years he travelled all over Europe including the British 
Isles, went as far north as Sweden, east to Poland and Lithu- 
ania, to Turkey, Greece, the Ionian islands and Alexandria. 
During his wanderings he practised medicine as an itinerant 


Vii 


38478 


Vili PREFACE 


doctor, visited mines and workshops, studied local diseases, 
and was eager to learn from any source, humble as it might be. 

In these years of wanderings, meditating over the problems 
of life and death, of health and disease, and of the world at 
large, he developed his own system of medicine and also a 
philosophy and theology of his own. He conceived disease in 
different terms than heretofore and applied in his therapy 
drugs, particularly chemical compounds, many of which had 
not been used before. A scientist and mystic, he tried to 
determine the place of man in the world, his relation to God, 
the causes of disease and its meaning. More and more he felt 
that he had a mission to fulfil and a message to carry to the 
people. Medicine had degenerated and was ripe for reforma- 
tion. He was to be the Luther of medicine. And since the 
people refused to listen, he yelled his message at them and 
became more and more bitter and aggressive. 

He wrote a great many books that cover a wide range of 
subjects, but there was a deliberate conspiracy against him 
and only a few of his works, and not the most important, were 
published during his lifetime. Whenever a publisher was will- 
ing to take a chance, organized medicine—in those days the 
medical faculties—brought pressure on him, threatening boy- 
cott, and the attempt was frustrated. 

Once he was given an opportunity to teach students and thus 
to spread his doctrines by word of mouth. In 1527 he was 
offered the position of muncipal physician in Basle, which in- 
cluded the privilege of giving courses at the university. He 
accepted eagerly and gave courses from 1527 to 1528. He was 
soon disappointed in his high expectations. Antagonized by 
his colleagues, not understood by the students, he soon had 
quarrels with everybody and left the city suddenly. 

He resumed his wanderings. Several times he attempted to 
settle down, always hoping to have his books printed, but cir- 
cumstances always drove him away. When he came to Salzburg 
in 1541, he was 48 years of age but an old man, sick and worn. 

His contemporaries knew little about him. He had few 
faithful disciples able to understand his thought and to endure 


PREFACE ix 


his rough manners. He undoubtedly had the reputation of an 
able physician who knew potent drugs and was particularly 
skillful in the treatment of wounds and other surgical diseases. 
Syphilis was one of them, and the only major works published 
during his life were the Grosse Wundargney and a treatise on 
syphilis. The violent tirades he directed against physicians 
missed their target because they were not printed. His philo- 
sophical and theological writings could have been known to 
only a very few people. He did not become the reformer of 
medicine. Two years after his death, in 1543, the Fabrica of 
Vesalius appeared, a book that inaugurated a reformation of a 
different kind, slower but more effective. Like a comet, Para- 
celsus went through the lands. His erratic ways and strange 
habits gave rise to legends while he was still alive, and to many 
he appeared as a mysterious Doctor Faustus who could perform 
miracles. 

A more correct appreciation began when some of his dis- 
ciples, notably Adam von Bodenstein and Johannes Huser, 
published his manuscripts and manuscript copies of his works. 
In the second half of the 16th and throughout the 17th century 
it was particularly his chemistry and chemotherapy that 
attracted wide attention. Van Helmont was strongly influenced 
by him, and the latrochemists drew freely from his works. 
Many of his remedies became generally accepted. And then, 
as today still, alchemists, astrologers, religious cranks and 
other mystics worshipped him as a master into whose works 
they could read whatever pleased them. Whenever medicine 
went through a mystic speculative phase, as was the case in 
Germany around 1800, and again today, the figure of Para- 
celsus came to the fore. He is very German in his desperate 
struggling for a philosophy that would unriddle heaven and 
earth, and also in his unbalanced aggressiveness. There is no 
greater contrast than between him and a thinker like Descartes. 

A study of Paracelsus is still very stimulating. He un- 
doubtedly was one of the most original personalities in a period 
that had produced many great characters, and whoever wants 
to have a picture of the Renaissance cannot ignore him. To 


39478 


x PREFACE 


the physician his approach to the problems of health and disease 
is very interesting. In his endeavor to establish a philosophy of 
medicine he attacked many problems that are still unsolved 
today. He was a spiritualist, and if we are rationalists we will 
feel closer to Descartes and to the 18th century but we cannot 
deny that Paracelsus drew our attention to many questions 
that still need investigation. 

The only access to Paracelsus’ thought is through his works, 
but the study of his books is very difficult. They were written 
not in Latin but in German, and not in modern high German 
but in the 16th century German of Switzerland. It was a 
language in which it was still difficult to express scientific 
matters, and even those who master the language will find 
many obscure passages. Translations into modern languages, 
therefore, require no justification. They are more than mere 
versions from one language into another; they are interpre- 
tations. 

In commemoration of the four hundredth anniversary of the 
death of Paracelsus we are presenting English translations of 
four treatises that illustrate four different aspects of his work. 

The first, a translation of Sieben Defensiones, V erantwor- 
tung tiber etliche Verunglimpfungen seiner Missgouner, is prob- 
ably Paracelsus’ most personal work. It is a passionate justi- 
fication of his character, activities and views, and gives a 
splendid picture of the man and of his basic ideas. We were 
particularly anxious to make this treatise available to the 
English-speaking public and C. Lilian Temkin’s translation has 
succeeded in being accurate while still preserving the flavor 
of the original style. 

The second treatise is a translation of Von der Bergsucht 
und andern Bergkrankheiten drei Biicher, a study on the dis- 
eases of miners. It is the first monograph ever written on the 
diseases of an occupational group and thus holds a very impor- 
tant place in the history of medical literature. Paracelsus had 
more practical experience in miners’ diseases than any physician 
of the time and his observations are very interesting. The 
book became the starting point of a new line of medical litera- 


PREFACE xi 


ture. Dr. George Rosen, one of the most promising of the 
younger medical historians, who has written a splendid— 
unfortunately still unpublished—book on the history of the 
diseases of miners and who has a thorough knowledge of 
German, was best prepared to undertake the translation and 
interpretation of this treatise. 

Then follows a translation of the treatise Von den Krank- 
heiten, so die Vernunfft berauben by Dr. Gregory Zilboorg. 
It is the most important document on the psychology and psy- 
chiatry of Paracelsus. Written at a time when mental diseases 
were again to be studied and treated by physicians, it is a 
pioneering book also, and anticipates modern views. Dr. Zil- 
boorg has just completed a book on the history of medical 
psychology and he previously wrote a study on The Medical 
Man and the Witch During the Renassance* so that he is the 
foremost expert in the psychiatry of that period. 

The last contribution, finally, is a translation of the Liber 
de nymplus, sylphis, pygmaeis et salamandris et de caeteris 
spiritibus. In spite of its Latin title the treatise was written 
in German. I became interested in it, years ago, in the course 
of studies on the survival of paganism in Christianity, and I 
was soon fascinated by its poetical character. All of us who 
had a classical education, whatever our present interests may 
be, have deep down in our hearts a nostalgia for the Greek 
world that was inhabited by such lovely creatures as the 
nymphs. I studied Paracelsus’ treatise primarily from the point 
of view of comparative literature and art, but I found that it 
is also a good sample of his philosophy and theology. And 
so I decided to include it in this volume. 

We all had to struggle with the difficulties presented by the 
Paracelsian language and style. A translation into modern 
English would destroy Paracelsian thought. And so we all 
tried to be as intelligible as possible while still following the 
original text as closely as we could. Each one of us has solved 
the problem in his own way. 


1 The Johns Hopkins Press, Baltimore, Md., 1935. 


xii PREFACE 


The four introductory essays preceding the translations were 
read at a Symposium on Paracelsus held at the Seventeenth 
Annual Meeting of the American Association of the History 
of Medicine in Atlantic City, on May 5, 1941. 

The Literature at the end of the book intends to be a short 
guide to those readers who would like to learn more about 
Paracelsus. 

In publishing this book we wish to contribute our share in 
reviving the personality of an honest man who was a great 
physician and a staunch fighter for what he considered the 
truth. It is so easy to be orthodox and to reap honors by repeat- 
ing what people expect and wish to hear. Progress, however, 
is achieved through the clash of ideas, and heretics like Para- 
celsus are a ferment without which there would be no life. 


Henry E. SIGERIST 


THE JoHns Hopkins INSTITUTE 
OF THE History oF MEDICINE 


September 24, 1941 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Reracece bE ENIR Vy) Hit SIGERIG Maree cislelareiciale eee) ove eleleralicners 


ie 


eT. 


TAT: 


TY. 


Seven Defensiones, the Reply to Certain Calumniations 
of His Enemies. 


Translated from the German, with an Introduction by 
COME TILE (CRINICUNG ole aeapeie cia d sivigie, She's ete nla ie a ene © 


On the Miners’ Sickness and Other Miners’ Diseases. 


Translated from the German, with an Introduction by 
GBOREEMEMOSEINGeya © oi sie okra ties aueg ca-cie's wiles de woes 


The Diseases That Deprive Man of His Reason, Such 
as St. Vitus’ Dance, Falling Sickness, Melancholy, and 
Insanity, and Their Correct Treatment. 
Translated from the German, with an Introduction by 
ERGY AECROORG yo coop. so sieusivistecn ers diate «vice e a8 


A Book on Nymphs, Sylphs, Pygmies, and Salaman- 
ders, and on the Other Spirits. 


Translated from the German, with an Introduction by 
HPS HEONT Ve eel SEGERUS I: oes 8\ aio'c) a g'e eae oral a 6 la: ae) aso eter a) 


TLANKSNEVRUNREY chee MO RNS Decl i bs OCA ENR eae ene eae 


43 


127 





I 
SEVEN DEFENSIONES 


THE REPLY TO CERTAIN CALUMNIATIONS OF 
HIS ENEMIES 


BY 


THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 
CALLED PARACELSUS 


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, WITH AN INTRODUCTION 


BY 
C. LILIAN TEMKIN 





INTRODUCTION 


In 1538, ten years after leaving Basel, Paracelsus settled 
down again for a few years in the Austrian province of Carin- 
thia, making it his second home. The intervening years of 
wandering had seen clashes with the medical faculties of the 
universities of Leipzig and Vienna, in which they successfully 
prevented the printing of his works. Now, however, he feels 
he is in sympathetic surroundings and it is therefore not hollow 
praise which he pours on the province of Carinthia, when it 
promises publication of three works which are now known 
as the Carinthian writings :-— 


The First Book: The Reply to certain Calumniations of his 
Enemies, or, as it is more commonly called, 
The Seven Defensiones. 

The Second: On the Errors and Labyrinth of the Physicians, 
that they should learn in other books than 
heretofore. 

The Third: On the Origin and Cause of Sand and Stone, 
also the Cure of the Same.* 


The result of his praise of his apparent patrons is pathetic 
indeed. There is an urgency pervading the writing, and yet, 
in spite of the promises to print it immediately, the manuscript 
lay idle for twenty-five years. It took the enthusiasm of a 
Paracelsist of the next generation, Dr. Theodor Byrckmann, 
backed by an official enquiry from the government at Vienna, 
to find the lost manuscript, which was then published in Cologne 
in the printing house of Dr. Byrckmann’s father, Arnold 
Byrckmann, in 1564.? 

The first of these Carinthian writings is now offered in 
English translation: the Seven Defensiones, which contain 


+ Cf. Huser, p. 143. 
2 Cf. Sudhoff (1928), Vorwort, pp. viii-xi. 


3 


4 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


in comparatively short space the quintessence of Paracelsian 
philosophy. 

At the age of forty-five, Paracelsus feels himself prematurely 
aged. All his life he has been at odds with medical authorities 
and he feels he must once and for all answer their charges and 
defend his own way of thought. It is obvious that such a 
defence is more than likely to turn into an attack on his oppon- 
ents and Paracelsus gives full vent to his anger against the 
traditionalists, the scholastic physicians, the ‘‘ sophistic legion,” 
as he calls them, and even the humanists whose quibbling con- 
cerning terminology arouses only his scorn. He conceives of 
the noble heritage of medicine as stemming from Apollo, 
Machaon, Podalirius and Hippocrates, who worked wonders 
in the Light of Nature. This Light of Nature is the light which 
is in nature, revealing her inmost being and hidden depths; 
it is hence the guiding principle of all knowledge of nature.* 
But medicine has fallen among the anti-physicians and its 
delivery out of their hands is the mission which Paracelsus 
takes upon himself. And indeed, in the light of this mission, 
the crimes of which his opponents accuse him must inevitably 
appear as essential virtues. 

He has been accused of lack of respect for medical tradition 
and he ridicules respect for a medical system because of its 
age alone, for new times require a new medicine. This deter- 
mination of Paracelsus to work in the present and disregard 
the past is reflected in his astronomical beliefs. For the medie- 
val astrologer, as well as for Paracelsus, the firmament is not 
only a measure of time, but inextricably associated with all 
events in time and, indeed, it varies its influence as it grows 
older. Paracelsus believes that each age is endowed with its 
own potentialities and its own destiny, and that the sole duty 
of man is to work within his own age to realize its potentialities 
and fulfil its destiny. At the same time he apparently uses the 
current historical terminology of the ‘ world-monarchies,’ a con- 


* Cf. Bodo Sartorius Freiherr von Waltershausen, Paracelsus am Eingang 
der deutschen Bildungsgeschichte, Leipzig, 1936, p. 104. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 5 


cept derived from the division of human history into four 
‘monarchies’ by St. Jerome.* He abandons the implied idea 
of limiting world history to but four periods of which the last 
was synonymous with the Roman Empire—a limitation long 
obsolete at his time but retained by the majority of historians— 
and speaks of ‘many’ monarchies, again imbuing an old term 
with the new meaning of ‘epoch.’ 

Not by their age but by their fruits, i.e. their works, are 
medical systems to be judged, according to Paracelsus. The 
false physician he sees hiding his ignorance behind senseless 
activities, or exploiting the credulity of the peasants to live 
on the fat of the land. The true physician, on the other hand, 
knows what to do and does it with expedition. He is honest in 
his dealings with his patients and earnest in his search for 
further knowledge. To him there are no incurable diseases, and 
indeed any such contention would seem impious to him. He 
knows God to be capable of curing all diseases, even the most 
striking and wondrous ones. To Paracelsus the practice of 
medicine is a supremely religious function. “ The physician,” 
he says, “is he who in the bodily diseases takes the place of 
God and administers for Him.” (p. 15) And indeed the re- 
ligious aspect of his philosophy colours not only his medical 
thought but also his literary expression. For him the physician 
must be motivated by the Christian injunction to love one’s 
neighbour ; he must acknowledge God as the only true fountain- 
head of the medical art and must accept God’s disposal of 
natural resources in humility and strive to extend his knowl- 
edge of it. The truth is to be sought both in nature and in 
Holy Writ, and the Seven Defensiones themselves evince the 
constant interplay of the two sources of knowledge in Para- 
celsus’ own medical system. Illustrations of medical axioms 
are inevitably drawn from the parables of Christ and this 
technique sometimes leads to a parallelism of argument which 
appears obscure to the modern reader, but which sheds con- 
siderable light on Paracelsian thought once its logic is fathomed. 


“Cf. Ernst Bernheim, Lehrbuch der historischen Methode und der Ge- 
schichtsphilosophie, Leipzig, 1903, pp. 66-67. 


6 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Paracelsus defends his introduction of new names and new 
prescriptions and his description of new diseases. The neglect 
of these new diseases by older physicians he ascribes cate- 
gorically to their ignorance of astronomy. The new names he 
justifies on the ground that the old are too complicated as to 
linguistic derivation—not that he does not understand each 
component part, for any simple scholar can read such names 
as are given by the ancients—but the composite terminology is 
meaningless and is, moreover, distorted from village to village. 
Paracelsus prefers to rename diseases, seeking not rhetoric or 
Latin in them, but medicine of which the old names gave him 
no account. 

But the greatest outcry against Paracelsus has been directed 
against his new prescriptions. He has been accused all his life 
of using poison and this accusation is aimed at the chemical 
aspect of his medical system. Paracelsus was adamant in his 
contention that the physician must be a chemist, and the opposi- 
tion to his practices long outlived Paracelsus himself. The use 
of inorganic, particularly metallic, elements in internal remedies 
was attacked as unnatural and poisonous for more than a cen- 
tury and the argument found one of its most acute expressions 
in the famous fight of the Paris faculty about antimony. 
Paracelsus refutes the contention on the ground that all things 
are poisonous if taken without respect to their proper dosage. 
Further, he accuses his opponents of using poisons too, and, 
what is worse, of not knowing the proper dosage. 

Paracelsus is accused of being a wayfarer, of being resident 
nowhere; but of this fact he is proud rather than ashamed. 
Indeed, wayfaring is for him not only a way of life but the 
expression of a philosophy. It is the only valid way to increase 
the physician’s knowledge; moreover, this knowledge, ‘ Erfah- 
rung,’ is to be understood not only in the secondary sense of 
‘experience,’ but in the primary sense too of ‘ experience gained 
by travel.’ © Only by the evidence of his senses can he be truly 
instructed; he must seek out nature and enquire into new dis- 


5 Cf, Friedrich Gundolf, Paracelsus, Berlin, 1927, pp. 16-20. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 4 


eases, for his teacher is not to be found in his own chimney- 
corner. The serenity of Paracelsus’ convictions in this respect 
is reflected in his memorable words on the Codex Naturae at 
the end of the Fourth Defence. 

The false physicians are pictured always as growing rich; 
they are spoilt by the ignorance of the people and do all for 
selfish gain, nothing for love, as the commandment bids. In 
this exaggerated condemnation Paracelsus seems to know of no 
exceptions amongst his predecessors and contemporaries since 
Hippocrates; but his venom singles out the Jewish physicians 
for an attack which voices the medieval prejudice against their 
people, just as does Shakespeare’s portrayal of Shylock. As 
he scorns the motives of the “false” physicians, so he scorns 
their manners. They accuse him of being a strange, surly 
fellow, but he is proud of the distinction and claims that 
civility is the least requirement of the physician. They cloak 
their lack of knowledge with worldly manners; he lays full 
stress on his works and demands that medicine be broad enough 
for the native manners of all practitioners. In this insistance 
on the part of Paracelsus on the performance of works as the 
only truly important function of the physician and on the works 
themselves as the only true criterion by which to judge his 
merit, we see the emergence of the Protestant ethic, in spite of 
Paracelsus’ own Catholicism. It lends a deeper meaning to his 
reputation as ‘Lutherus medicorum,’ and the vigour of his 
language in spite of the limitations of the German of his day 
contributes further to the similarity between the two great 
contemporaries. 

The apothecaries complain that he is strange and eccentric, 
yet all he does is demand good drugs and reject their Quid pro 
Quo, i. e. their convenient substitutes for drugs prescribed, and 
write short prescriptions which do not empty the apothecaries’ 
boxes quickly enough to fill their pockets with gold at the accus- 
tomed rate. He is accused, too, of being slow at diagnosis, yet 
this he deems a virtue. Only the followers of the Galenic 
doctrine of the four humours diagnose hidden diseases rapidly, 
and with what dire results! 


8 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Thus does Paracelsus justify his ways “ for the last time 
until further provocation, which, if God will, will also be 
returned blow for blow.” He defends himself with deep sin- 
cerity, with a conviction founded on an almost naive combina- 
tion of humility before God and nature, and pride in his own 
achievements. He demands of medicine and of the physician 
a program of Christian love and compassion, and a knowledge 
not to be culled from the scholastic authorities he despises, but 
from investigation and experimentation. 

The Seven Defensiones are not without their difficulties for 
the translator, for the bitterness of the author is often con- 
densed in the most rugged of metaphors and his style is at once 
abrupt and obscure, but the passion of this scientific revolu- 
tionary cannot but fire the imagination of the reader. At the 
same time, it must be admitted that some few passages defy 
lucid explanation and here I felt that too free and logical an 
interpretation would only falsify the whole picture. Early 
sixteenth century German was a very imperfect instrument of 
literary expression; it abounds in awkward turns of phrase, 
grammatically incomplete sentences, and utter inconsistency 
as to genders, the use of weak endings, etc. As such it pre- 
sents the translator with a task of interpretation far exceeding 
the interpretive element implicit in the translation of a modern 
text. This element has been allowed such free rein in, for 
instance, the Latin version of the Seven Defensiones, that the 
two texts are scarcely comparable. I have resorted to this 
extreme of interpretation only in the few instances where an 
idiomatic expression or play upon words could not be rendered 
in any literal manner ; nevertheless my translation lays no claim 
to exemption from the general character of ‘ interpretation’ 
which would seem inevitable in any approach to an understand- 
ing of Paracelsus, whatever the language used. I have attempted, 
however, to retain as much of the style and linguistic quality 
as possible, and to this end I have kept as many of the fre- 
quently interspersed Latin expressions as fitted easily into the 
English sentences. Where alterations in the Latin form would 
have been required, the Latin has been translated and the 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 9 


English rendering capitalised, and all proper names have been 
given in English. 
The translation has been based on the edition by Johannes Huser: 
Der Buecher und Schrifften des Edlen... Philippi Theophrasti Bombast 
von Hohenheim Paracelsi genannt, Ander Theil, Basel 1589, pp. 
157-190. 


In addition I have consulted: 

Byrckmann’s edition: Drey Buecher Durch den Hochgelerten Herrn 
Theophrastum von Hohenheim Paracelsum genant, etc., Coeln 
1564, pp. 1-52. (Facsimile edition, Leipzig 1928). 

Aur. Philip. Theoph. Paracelsi . . . Opera omnia medico-chemico- 
chirurgica, Volumen primum, Genevae, 1658, pp. 248-264. 
Theophrast von Hohenheim (Paracelsus), Sieben Defensiones, etc. 
Eingeleitet und herausgegeben von Karl Sudhoff, Leipzig 1915. 
(Klassiker der Medizin, herausgegeben von Karl Sudhoff, Bd. 

24). This will be quoted as Sudhoff (1915). 

Theophrast von Hohenheim gen. Paracelsus, Saemtliche Werke. I. 
Abteilung herausgegeben von Karl Sudhoff, 11. Band, Muenchen 
und Berlin 1928, pp. 125-160. This will be quoted as Sudhoff 
(1928). 


10 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


THE REPLY TO CERTAIN CALUMNIATIONS OF 
HIS ENEMIES 


(SEVEN DEFENSIONES) 


PREFACE TO THE READER BY THE Most LEARNED GENTLEMAN 
AUREOLUS THEOPHRASTUS VON HoHENHEIM, 
Doctor oF BotH MEDICINES 


Reader, pay heed, that I may tell thee why these Defensiones 
have been written by me. Whereas God suffered the spirit of 
medicine to emerge in its fundamentals through Apollo, 
through Machaon, Podalirius* and Hippocrates, and suffered 
the light of nature to work without a darkened spirit, exceeding 
wonderful great works, great Magnalia,’ great Miracula, were 
performed through the Mysteries, Elixirs, Arcana and Essences 
of nature, and medicine was marvellously conceived in a few 
pious men, as was told above. Whereas, however, the Evil 
One with his corncockles * and his weeds suffers nothing to 
grow for us in an undefiled wheatfield, medicine has been 
darkened by the first spirit of nature and has fallen among 
the anti-physicians and has become so entangled with persons 
and sophistries, that no one has been able to advance as far in 
the work as Machaon and Hippocrates did. And in medicine 
what is not proved with works has lost its disputation and 
gains still less by argument. Now, my Reader, pay heed: if 
an effective doctrine set itself against the sophistic legion, would 
it not be justified, in order that the work might floor the 
gossip? Guess then, Reader, of whom I speak. It is of the holy 
ones who give no signs. The throngs and the concourse might 
frighten many a one, so that he would refrain from shutting 


® Machaon and Podalirius are the legendary physicians who fought in the 
Greek army before Troy. 

™J.e. mighty works. 

® Cf. Sudhoff (1915), p. 13, footnote. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 11 


the mouth of the chatterer. But the result and the retraced 
steps prove that no store should be set by the concourse. From 
it arises the error that Hippocrates must be a gossip and the 
spirit of truth in medicine must become a sophistic chatterer. 
For what is there that is too much for a gossip? Of this rabble, 
some have let their mouths be overhasty and have defended 
themselves in this with infamous words, and since they have 
taken medicine into their mouths, they must defend themselves 
with their mouths, which can do nought but vilify and slander. 
Such Lingua dolosa® has had a tilt at me too. But it is neces- 
sary not to leave them unanswered in these things as they are 
not built on the first rocks of medicine but have placed them- 
selves on a kitchen rock,*® and have forgotten the truth of the 
medical art, and have borne me and others around in false 
faces with their sophistic Fables. If a man were dedicated to 
the first Centrum,* such abuse would not proceed from him. 
Their best art is their rhetoric and its ilk, and the virtue apper- 
taining to Pseudo-physicians. Wherefore, Reader, the replies 
follow below, so that and in order that you may be able to 
decide in this matter. Although it would not be necessary to 
refute the contentions of such people: one might allow them 
to remain poetic physicians, rhetorical writers of prescriptions 
and nebulous preparers: in time people would tire of them. 
In order, however, that it may be understood that a physician 
is of no account without works and that the work of physicians 
is not empty talk, for the sake of teaching these things have I 
undertaken this. And so, dear Reader, hindered as I have been 
from publishing my writings, I have presented this to Carin- 
thia, the archduchy, so it would reach thee through these same 
worthy gentlemen, wherever in the world thou mayest receive 
it. For without this province, Reader, it would not come into 
thy hands. Love, therefore, the Theoricam in this work, but still 
much more the works of the art. Set down in Sanct Veit in 


®T.e. deceitful talk. 
*° Probably means their medicine is based only on the apothecary’s kitchen. 
1 For the meaning cf. Von Waltershausen, I. c., p. 58 ff. 


12 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Carinthia, on the 19th day of August of the lesser reckoning, 
33:7 


THE First DEFENCE IN THE DISCOVERY OF THE NEW 
MEDICINE oF Doctor THEOPHRASTUS 


That I here in this work introduce a new Theoricam, also 
Physicam, together with new Concepts which heretofore have 
never been held, nor understood by Philosophers, Astronomers, 
nor Physicians, comes to pass for the reasons which I shall now 
relate to you:— One reason, for instance, which is sufficiently 
proven, viz: that the old Theorici described the Rationes and 
Causas Morborum wrongly and inaccurately and thus intro- 
duced such error, and so confirmed this error, that it was held 
and considered just and incontrovertible. And it is so deeply 
rooted and so tended and preserved, that no one may any more 
seek an alternative, or the same is deemed an error. This 
I wish to make known to you, for I am bound to judge such 
a thing as great foolishness: since heaven is forever bearing 
and creating Ingenta, new Inventiones, new Artes, new Aegri- 
tudines in the light of nature, should not these then also be 
valid? Of what avail is the rain that fell a thousand years ago? 
That which falls at present avails. Of what avail to the present 
year is the sun’s course of a thousand years ago? Does not 
Christ interpret how we are to judge this, saying: it is sufficient 
that the day bear its own yoke? That is as much as to say: it 
is enough that thou doest what the day brings and that thou 
dost further conclude that the morrow too will bear its own 
cares. Now since care walks alone and every day has xii hours, 
and every hour its separate action, what harm then does the 
twelfth hour do to the first, or of what disadvantage to the 
first is the twelfth? Thus everything is set down in its own 
Monarchiam* according to its time. And concerning the present 
should we trouble ourselves, not concerning the past. And each 
Monarchia is provided with the full light of nature. These are 


7“ Ter mindern zal 38 [1538],” Sudhoff (1928), p. 126. The “ numerus 
minor ” indicates the number of years after 1500. 
18 Cf. Introduction, p. 4f. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 13 


the miracles of God: to vary the light of nature in many 
Monarchas between the beginning and the end of the world, 
which has often been overlooked and men have not acted accord- 
ing to what is contained in these monarchies. Therefore I, 
by virtue of the present light of nature, and according to the 
predestined order of the present monarchy, I will be unrebuked 
by anyone in my writing, and still less attacked and hindered 
on account of sophistry which I call an error in medicine. 
Their foolishness I must the better expose for the sake of 
making known my reasons and their error, and in this the 
universities will not overthrow me and this, then, I make known 
to them. Medicine is a work and since it is a work, the work 
will testify to its master. Now behold in the works how every 
part is known and judged: the work is an art, the art gives 
the doctrine of the work, so that the art acts to perform the 
work through its doctrine. Now the question is whether the 
doctrine of the physicians of the universities is the art of 
medicine, or whether mine is: this will be proved through 
works. Now take note what Christ charges in our philosophy— 
and it is necessary for us to understand it—Christ who not 
only renewed the eternal light among mortal men, but also 
natural light, saying: False prophets and false Christs will 
arise, etc., and will give and perform many signs; thus, although 
false physicians too perform signs, as they may contend, these 
are nevertheless no argument against true medicine. For just 
as Moses and the Malefici** were ranged against one another 
in their works, so too the true and the false foundation of 
medicine. So now I give a true indication how to recognise 
my Adversam partem and myself in the works, and works are 
found among the false too, as Christ says De Prodigtis et 
Signis. So I will differentiate between them for you in this 
manner: If there were a man sick of a fever due to end in 
xii weeks, and then it would be over and done with, and if it 
happened that the sick man demanded medicine to drive out 
this fever before its appointed end, he would have two kinds of 


14T.e. sorcerers. 


14 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


physician before him, the false and the true. The false pro- 
ceeds as follows: he begins gradually and slowly to doctor 
him, spends much time on Syrups, on Laxatives, on purgatives 
and oatmeal mushes, on barley, on pumpkins, on Melons, on 
julep and other such rubbish, is slow and frequently administers 
enemas, does not know himself what he is doing, and thus 
drags along with time and gentle words till he comes to the 
term. Then he ascribes the spontaneous end to art. But know 
the true physician by this: he divides this Terminum* into 
xii parts, and one and a half he takes for his work, etc. 
There is further a great lack of understanding which con- 
strained me mightily to write this work, viz.: they say that the 
diseases which I handle in this work, are incurable. Now behold 
their great foolishness: how can a physician say that a dis- 
ease in which death is not, cannot be cured? Thus they say of 
Podagra, thus of the falling sickness. Oh! fools that you are, 
who bids you speak that can do and know nothing? Why do 
you not consider the words of Christ, when he says the sick 
have need of the physician? For are not they sick whom you 
cast off? I think so. Now if they are sick, as it proves, then 
they have need of the physician. Now if they have need of the 
physician, why do you say they cannot be helped? It is for 
this that they need him, that they may be helped through the 
medium of the physician. Why then do they say that they 
cannot be helped? They say it because they were born of the 
erring of medicine and want of understanding is the mother 
who bore them. Each disease has its own physic. For God 
desires wondrously to be seen in the sick, for instance in the 
diseases of the falling sickness, in stroke, in St. Vitus’ dance, 
in all others which it is not necessary to mention here. For 
God it is, who commanded: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as 
thyself and thou shalt love God above all things. If, now, thou 
wilt love God, thou must also love His works. If thou wilt 
love thy neighbour, thou must not say: For thee there is no 
help. But thou must say: I cannot do it and I understand it 


15 T.e. the predestined period. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 15 


not. This truth shields thee from the curse that descends on 
the false. So take heed what is told thee; the rest shall be 
sought after until the art is found from which good works 
proceed. For if Christ says: Perscrutamim Scripturas,** why 
should I not say of this: Perscrutamim Naturas Rerum? ** 

Thus have I wished to defend myself that I justly bring 
forth and reveal a new medicine according to the present 
Monarchy. And although it be said: Who teaches thee so to do?, 
I ask thee: Who teaches the day’s foliage and grass to grow? 
For the Same has said: Come unto Me and learn from Me, 
for I am mild and humble in heart. From Him flows the foun- 
dation of truth and what does not proceed from Him is cor- 
ruption. The devil is Mille Artifex in whom abide many false 
Signa and Prodigia, who rests not, who pursues us like a growl- 
ing lion to make liars of us as well as himself. 

You should not be astonished that at the close of this 
defence I draw your attention and point to Him who said: 
“IT am meek and humble in heart,’ that you should learn medi- 
cine from Him Who alone is a teacher of the eternal. But 
what is there in us mortals that reaches us not and comes not 
to us from God? He Who teaches the eternal, teaches also 
mortal things, for they have a common origin. And although 
it is true that the eternal teaching has spoken in words, and 
medicine has not, yet when He says: ‘ The sick have need of a 
physician,’ and ‘The physician is of God,’ how can the physi- 
cian not acknowledge Him as his teacher, of Whom he comes? 
The physician is he who in the bodily diseases takes the place 
of God and administers for Him, and therefore he must have 
from God that of which he is capable. For in the same way as 
physic is not of the physician, but of God, so is the physician’s 
art not of the physician, but of God. However, there are three 
kinds of physician: one kind is born of nature, delivered by 
the heavenly physicians, conceived under the influence of the 
constellation, just as the Musici and Mechanict, the Rethorici 


1€T.e. investigate the Scriptures. 
*7T. e. investigate the nature of things. 


16 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


and the Artes are born. Then too another kind: these are the 
physicians who are taught by men, brought up in medicine and 
instructed in it, as much as it is possible for men to learn, or 
according to their abilities. The third is a kind given by God 
and these have learned of God. As Christ says: Every scribe 
will be taught by God: that is to say, what we can do we have 
from God. Now as medicine produces its Professores in three 
ways, should not one see if they do not agree in their Theory 
and Concepts? In the work they all meet and determine an end 
and Terminum. Nature gives her kind as conception received 
her influence: man too teaches according to his abilities. God 
teaches according to His will. But this is the conclusion of all 
these things: that, the man who desires to teach men must 
derive his learning from God and from nature, and from the 
same must men learn. Whatever teaching comes otherwise 
than from the source, is as is indicated in the next error. 


THe OTHER DEFENCE CONCERNING THE NEw DISEASES 
AND Nomina oF THE ABOVE-MENTIONED 
Doctor THEOPHRASTUS 


To defend and protect myself, to shelter myself, in that I 
describe and depict new diseases never before described, and 
new Nomina never before employed, but given by me: Pay 
heed therefore why this happens—it is because of new dis- 
eases, that I may indicate them. I write of the crazy dance 
which the common man calls St. Vitus’ dance, also of those 
who kill themselves, also of false maladies which befall through 
sorcery, as well as of people possessed. It seems unjust to me 
that these diseases should never have been described by medi- 
cine, that they should have been forgotten. But what causes 
me to do this and brings me to it is the fact that astronomy, 
which heretofore has never been taken up by physicians, teaches 
me to recognise such diseases. If the other physicians had 
been as experienced in astronomy, they would have been 
explained and discovered completely long before me. Since, 
however, Astronomia is rejected by physicians, these diseases 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 17 


and many others, together with their true causes, can be neither 
recognized nor understood. Since now the medicine of the 
other authors does not flow from the spring from which medi- 
cine takes its origin, the origin and spring of which I may 
boast, should I not then have authority to write differently 
from another writer? To everyone it is given to speak, to 
advise and to teach, but it is not given to everyone to speak and 
teach things of strength. For you know that the Gospel too 
testifies that when Christ taught, He spoke as One who had 
authority and not as the scribes and hypocrites. Such authority 
one should respect as proves itself with works, if one is in- 
credulous of the word. Therefore am I well aware that little 
as a man can describe in detail how a thing is formed, if he has 
never seen it with his eyes, compared to a man who has seen 
it with his eyes, so the same judgment will be passed here 
between those who speak without reason and those who speak 
with reason. It is not less so with a sick man; he belongs under 
the physician, and justly all diseases should be known to them. 
However, what the physician may not know in one, that he 
should know in another. For thus too were the talents of the 
apostles distributed and what is given to each, in that he 
takes pride: what is not given to him is no disgrace to him. 
For as God desires each man to be, so he remains. The other 
authors cannot boast of such talents: they rejoice in their term, 
and what they cannot accomplish through the Terminum they 
say is impossible to cure. 

Further, that I defend myself because I write new Nomina 
and new Recepta: at this you should not marvel. It happens 
not because of my simplicity or ignorance; on the contrary, 
everyone can well realise that any simple scholar can read such 
Nomina as were given by the Ancients, also their prescriptions, 
from the paper and recognise them. But what drives me away 
from them, is that the Nomina are put together and composed 
of so many different languages, that we can nevermore get 
things of this kind thoroughly into our heads. And they them- 
selves do not understand and recognise their own Nomina; 
moreover in the German tongue the Nomina are changed from 


3 


18 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


one village to another. And although some people have written 
Pandectas ** and so on, they have hit upon other things which 
to believe is not in me. And this for many reasons. That I 
should wish to put myself in such danger and should willingly 
enter upon such an uncertified apprenticeship, this my con- 
science will not do. For in these same authors no chapter is 
free of lies and great errors, but something is found there that 
spoils it all. How then should these authors please me? I seek 
not Rhetoricam or Latin in them, but I seek medicine of which 
they can give me no account. Thus too with the prescriptions, 
they say I write them new receipts and introduce a new pro- 
cedure. As they have told me to my face: I am to use nothing 
strange, according to the meaning of God’s tenth command- 
ment: Thou shalt not covet strange things. Since now they 
blame and scold me as a transgressor against the tenth com- 
mandment, it is necessary for me to discover what is strange 
or not strange. Namely, that a man enter not by the right 
door, is strange; that a man take what belongs not to him. 
For example, that a man claims to be a physician and is it 
not, that a man doctor with things in which there is no medi- 
cine. Should I be blamed for being able to discover these tricks ? 

Further, that I should write about people possessed is 
thoroughly distasteful to them, yet I do it not for this reason. 
Since fasting and prayer drive out evil spirits, I consider it 
especially to be recommended to the physician first to seek the 
kingdom of God and afterwards what he needs will be given 
unto him. If it is given to him through prayer to make the sick 
healthy, allow that it is a good purgation. If it is given to him 
through fasting, allow that it is a good Confortativum.” Tell 
me one thing: Is medicine only in herbs, wood and stones, and 
not in words? Then I will tell you what words are. What is 
it that words cannot do? As the disease is, so also is the medi- 
cine: if the disease is entrusted to the herbs, it will be healed 
by means of herbs. If it is under the stones, it will also be 


78In the fourteenth century, for instance, Matthaeus Sylvaticus wrote 
“Pandectae Medicinae,” an alphabetically arranged reference book. 
2°T.e. a strengthening medicine. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 19 


nourished under them; if it is subject to fasting, it must be 
driven away by fasting. Possession is the great disease. Nowas 
Christ demonstrates the remedy, why should not I investi- 
gate the same writing, as to what the prescriptions contain and 
are in this malady? Heaven makes disease: the physician drives 
it away again. Now just as heaven has to yield to the physician, 
so too must the devil yield through the right ordering of medi- 
cine. The neoteric and modern physicians carry on as they do, 
because the loquacious Mesue *° did not think of such things, 
nor others whose Aemuli they are. 

I have been charged too with giving diseases new Nomina 
which no one recognises nor understands. Why do I not adhere 
to the old Names? How can I use the old Nomina when they 
are not derived from the origin from which the disease rises, 
but are only Sur-nomina, of which no one truly knows whether 
he rightly calls the disease by that name or not. Since then I 
find and recognise such uncertain ground, why should I give 
myself so much trouble on account of the Nomina? If I under- 
stand and recognise the disease, I can well create a name myself 
for the child. Why should I say Apoplexis or Apoplexia? or, 
why should I bother whether Paralysis is a product or a cor- 
ruption, or whether Caducus fulguris is called Epilentia or 
Epilepsia? or what care I whether it be Graecum, Arabicum or 
Algoicum? *? I am concerned only with finding out the origin 
of a disease and its treatment and with relating the name to this. 
Those are things which only waste time with useless talk. 

To instruct you further as to the new diseases which I 
announce in one way or another: there are yet more causes 
which constrain to seek new diseases. For instance, the sky 
has a different action every day, changes daily its constitution. 
The reason is, it too is growing older. For in the same way, 
when a child is born it changes according to its age, the further 
the more different from youth, down to the Terminum of death. 


2° Paracelsus probably refers to a medieval pharmacological work sup- 
posedly written by one Mesue. 

21“ corrumpiert,’ Byrckmann, p. 16. 

227 e. the dialect of the Allgaeu in Bavaria. 


20 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Now the sky too was a child, it too had its beginning and is 
predestined to its end, like man, and death is in it and around 
it. Now as everything changes with age, the works of the 
same change also. And if there are changes in the works, 
of what avail to me then is the rod of young children? For 
this reason I speak of the present monarchies, because of the 
age of the firmament and the elements. And further, there 
is such a throng * of people and such an intermingling amongst 
them with all the conduct of men in fleshly lusts, as have never 
been before as long as the world has stood. Thence there comes 
such a Pressura gentium,”* such, too, as has never been before: 
and from this there results a medicine which has never before 
existed. Therefore can the physician not make shift as does he 
who says: I manage with the books which were written two 
thousand years ago. There are never again the same Causae: 
things are more biting now, as both philosophies of heaven 
and the elements sufficiently prove. The above-mentioned 
Doctores of medicine should consider better what they plainly 
see, that for instance an unlettered peasant heals more than all 
of them with all their books and red gowns. And if those 
gentlemen in their red caps were to hear what was the cause, 
they would sit in a sack full of ashes as did they in Nineveh. 
Thus I know now that in accordance with this Defence and 
for the reasons given, I can well describe and give new Nomina 
and new diseases. 


Tue Tuirp DEFENCE 
CONCERNING THE DESCRIPTION OF THE NEW RECEIPTS 


But above and beyond what has been said, the outcry is still 
greater among the ununderstanding, supposed and fictional 
physicians who say that the prescriptions which I write are 
poison, corrosive, and an extraction of all that is evil and 
poisonous in nature. To such a contention and outcry my first 


23“ menge,” Sudhoff (1928), p. 136. Byrckmann and Huser both have 
“ meinung.” 
24T_e. affliction of the people. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES PAN 


question, if they were clever enough to answer it, would be, 
whether they knew what was poison and what not, or whether 
in poison there is no Mysteriwm of nature? For in this point 
they are lacking in understanding and ignorant of natural 
forces. For what has God created that is not blessed with a 
great gift for the good of man? Why then should poison be 
rejected and despised, if not the poison but nature be sought? 
I will give you an example that you may understand my inten- 
tion. Behold the toad, how poisonous indeed and detestable a 
creature it is: behold also the great Mysterium which is in it 
concerning the pestilence. If then the Mysterium should be 
despised because of the poisonous and detestable character of 
the toad, what a mockery that would be! Who is it who com- 
posed the receipt of nature? Was it not God? Why should I 
despise His Compositum, even though what He mixes seems 
inadequate to me? It is He in Whose hand abideth all wisdom 
and He knows where to put each Mysteriwm. Why then should 
I marvel or let myself be frightened because one part is poison, 
and despise the other part too? Each thing should be used for 
what it is ordained and we should have no further fear of it. 
For God Himself is the physician and the medicine. And every 
physician should acknowledge the strength of God which Christ 
interprets to us, saying: And though you drink poison, it will 
not harm you. Now if the poison conquers not but enters 
without harm when we use it according to nature’s ordered 
way, why then should poison be despised? Who despises poison, 
knows not what is in the poison. For the Arcanum which is 
in the poison is so blessed, that the poison detracts nothing 
from it, nor harms it. Not that I would wish to have satisfied 
you with this verse and Paragraph, or to have defended myself 
sufficiently ; rather is it necessary to give you further account, 
if I am sufficiently to explain poison. 

How is it that you see in me that with which you are all 
filled and rebuke me for a lentil, when melons lie in you? 
You rebuke me for my prescriptions: consider yours, how they 
are. First, for instance, with your purging. Where in all your 
books is a Purgatio that is not poison, or serves not death, 


22 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


or can be used without annoyance, if Dosis is not given its 
proper weight? Now pay heed to what this means: it is not 
too much, nor too little. He who strikes the middle, receives 
no poison. And even if I used poison, which you cannot prove, 
but if I did indeed use it and gave its Dosin, am I punishable 
for this, or not? This I desire to make known to all and sundry. 
You know that Thyriac is made from the snake Thyro: why 
do you not condemn your thyriac also, since the poison of this 
snake is in it? But since you see that it is useful, and not 
harmful, you are silent. If then my medicine is found to be not 
less than thyriac, why should it pay for being new? Why 
should it not be just as good as an old one? If you wish justly 
to explain each poison, what is there that is not poison? All 
things are poison, and nothing is without poison: the Dosis 
alone makes a thing not poison. For example, every food and 
every drink, if taken beyond its Dose, is poison: the result 
proves it. I admit also that poison is poison: that it should, 
however, therefore be rejected, is impossible. Now since noth- 
ing exists which is not poison, why do you correct? Only in 
order that the poison may do no harm. If I too have corrected 
in like manner, why then do you punish me? You know that 
Argentum vivum is nothing but poison and daily experience 
proves it. Now you have this in use, you anoint patients with 
it, much more thickly than a cobbler anoints leather with grease. 
You fumigate with its cinnabar, you wash with its sublimate 
and do not wish people to say it is poison; yet it is poison and 
you introduce such poison into man. And you say it is health- 
ful and good, it is corrected with white lead, just as if it were not 
poison. Take them to Nuernberg for examination, the Recepta 
that you and I write, and see there who uses poison or not. 
For you know not the correction of Mercury, nor its Dosin; 
but you anoint with as much as will go in. One thing I must 
ask you to think out: whether your Recepta, which you say 
are without poison, can cure the Caducum,”* or not, or Poda- 
gram or Apoplexiam; or whether with your sugar of roses you 


25 T.e. epilepsy. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 23 


can cure St. Vitus’ dance and the Lunaticos, or other similar 
diseases? Indeed you have not done it with that and will still 
not do it with that. So it must be something else: why then 
must you be vexed with me when I take what I must and should 
take, for what it is ordained? I let Him answer for it, Who 
composed it thus in the creation of heaven and earth. More- 
over, as the art is given us of separating two antagonistic 
things from one another, why then should poison be said from 
the beginning to be present? Consider all my Recepta, whether 
it is not my first principle that the good be separated from the 
bad? Is not this separation my correction? Should I not 
administer and use such a corrected Arcanum, since I can find 
nothing evil in it, and you much less? You object to my Vitriolum 
in which there is great mystery and more avail in it than in all 
the apothecaries’ boxes. You cannot say it is poison; if you 
say it is corrosive, tell me in what form? You must make it 
so, or else it is not corrosive. If it can be made into a corrosive, 
you can also prepare it as a Dulcedinem,”* for these are both 
together. As the preparation is, so too is the vitriol; and what 
every Simplex is in itself, is by art made into many beings, into 
all shapes and forms like food which stands on the table. If 
man eats it, it becomes human flesh, through a dog dog’s flesh, 
through a cat cat’s flesh. Thus is it with medicine: it becomes 
what you make of it. If it is possible to make evil out of good, it 
is also possible to make good out of evil. No one should con- 
demn a thing who knows not its transmutation and who knows 
not what separation does. Though a thing is poison, it may 
well be turned into non-poison. Take an example from Arsenic, 
which is one of the chief poisons and a Drachma kills any steed: 
burn it with Sal mitri and it is no longer poison. Eating ten 
pounds is harmless. Behold then what the difference is and 
what preparation does. 

But he who would punish, the same should first learn so that, 
when he punishes, he does not disgrace himself. I can well 
see your foolishness and simplicity in the fact, too, that you 


26T.e. sweetness. 


24 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


know not what you say and that one must make considerable 
allowance for your good-for-nothing tongues. I write new 
Recepta, for the old are useless. And there are new diseases, 
demanding new Recepta. But mark this in all my prescriptions : 
whatever I may take, I take that in which is the Arcanum 
against the disease which I am fighting. And notice further 
what I do to it: I separate what is not Arcanum from what 
is Arcanum and give to the Arcanum its right Dosin. Now I 
know that I have defended my Recepta well, and that you scold 
me concerning them out of your envious hearts, and offer your 
useless Recepta. If you were of good conscience you would 
give up: but your hearts are full and your mouths run over. 
I put five Defensiones in this work: read them through and 
you will find the reasons why I make the Recepta from the 
same Simples as you denounce as being poison. Why should 
I pay because I lay the foundation which you cannot see? If 
you were experienced in the things in which a physician should 
be experienced, you would change your minds. But this you 
should remember: that what turns out to the good of man is 
not poison. Poison is alone what turns out to the harm of man, 
what is not of service to him but injurious, as your Recepta 
sufficiently testify, where no art is considered, except only 
pounding, mixing and pouring. Herewith then I have desired 
to defend and protect myself, that my Recepta are administered 
and applied according to the order of nature, and that you 
yourselves know not what you say, but use your tongues like 
a madman, uncomprehending and unthinking. 


Tue FourtH DEFENCE 


CoNcERNING My JOURNEYINGS 


It is necessary that I answer for my journeyings and for the 
fact that I am resident nowhere. Now how can I be against 
that or force that, which to force is not possible for me? Or, 
what can I give to or take from predestination? Yet I have to 
exonerate myself in some measure to you, since I am so much 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 25 


harangued to, to vex me and ridicule me too, because I am 
a wayfarer and as though I were therefore the less worthy. 
No one should take it amiss, if I should complain about this. 
The journeys which I have thus far made have profited me 
much, for the reason that no man’s master is in his home and 
none has his teacher in the chimney-corner. Thus the arts are 
not all confined within one’s fatherland, but they are distributed 
over the whole world. Not that they are in one man alone, 
or in one place: on the contrary, they must be gathered 
together, sought out and captured, where they are. The whole 
firmament testifies with me that the Jnclinationes are distri- 
buted severally, not only in each person’s own village; rather, 
according to the contents of the uppermost sphere, the Radu 
too find their goal.”’ Is it not just and very fitting that I should 
investigate and seek out these goals, and see what is wrought 
in each one? If I failed in this, I should not rightly be the 
Theophrastus I am. Is it not true, art pursues no man, but 
must be pursued? Therefore do I have authority and reason 
to seek her, and not she me. Take an example: If we would 
go to God, we must go to Him, for He says: Come to me. 
Now since this is so, we must go after what we want. Thus 
it follows: if a man desire to see a person, to see a country, 
to see a city, to know these same places and customs, the nature 
of heaven and the elements, he must go after them. For, for 
them to go after him, is not possible. Thus the way for any- 
one who would see and experience something is that he go 
after the same and competently enquire; and when things go 
best, move on to further experiences. 

How can a good Cosmographus grow in the chimney-corner, 
or a Geographus? Does not sight give the eyes a true founda- 
tion? Then let the foundation be made firm. What then says 
the baker of pears in the chimney-corner? What can the car- 
penter say without his sight’s information? Or what can be 
testified without sight? Did not God allow Himself to be seen 
with the eyes, and does He not call us to witness that our eyes 


27 For this concept cf. Von Waltershausen, 1. c., p. 58 ff. 


26 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


have seen Him? How then should an art or anything else 
renounce the testimony of the eyes? I have sometime heard of 
those experienced in laws, how they wrote in their laws that 
a physician should be a wayfarer: this pleases me greatly. 
The reason is that diseases wander hither and thither through- 
out the breadth of the world, and stay not in one place. If a 
man wish to recognise many diseases, let him travel: if he 
travel far, his experience will be great and he will learn to 
recognise many things. And if it were to come to pass that 
he return to his mother’s bosom, if then such a foreign guest 
come into his native land, he will know him. But if he were 
not to know him, it would be a mockery and a great shame, 
for he would be unable to do for his neighbour what he has 
loudly boasted of knowing. If then what I do for the common 
good should be taken amiss, it would trouble me. Yet only 
the cushion-sitters do so, who without a sledge, carriage, and 
wagon cannot go outside the gates and know not with their 
art how to get to a shoe-maker’s for a pair of shoes except on 
an ass and for a ducat. If without a ducat thou canst do 
nothing for a pair of shoes, then art thou thyself an ass and 
ducat. They are not Perambulani ** either, wherefore they hate 
that which they are not. They hate the better because they are 
themselves the worse. Now I know that travel does not spoil 
but *° improves. Does not travel make every action better, 
does not travel confer more understanding than sitting by the 
stove? A physician should not be a niggard: he should let him- 
self be seen further afield. Nevertheless, fashioned as they are 
in the world in my times, they like neither to travel nor to learn. 
To this the people bring them by continually giving them more 
money, although they know nothing. When they notice that the 
peasants know not how a physician should be, they stay in the 
chimney-corner, seat themselves in the midst of books, and 
ride thus in the Ship of Fools. 

A physician should first of all be an Astronomus. Now 


*8T.e. wanderers. Byrckmann, p. 28, has “parabolani,’ which makes 
equally good sense, cf. footnote 30. 
2° “ sonder,” Byrckmann, p. 28. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 27 


necessity demands that his eyes should give him evidence, in 
order that he may be such: without this evidence he is only 
an astronomical gossip. It demands too that he should be a 
Cosmographus: not to describe how the countries wear their 
trousers, but to attack more bravely what diseases they have. 
Although it be thine intention and desire to be able to make 
the costumes of this land from what thou hast learned here, 
and thou excusest thyself thus from gaining knowledge of 
strange lands, what concern is it of the physician’s that thou 
art a tailor? Wherefore, as the things now mentioned must be 
experienced, they belong to us Parabolanis*® and are bound 
up with medicine and not to be separated from it. Thus it is 
also necessary that the physician should be a Philosophus and 
that his eyes inform him in order that he may be such: if 
he desires to be one, he must gather together from all quarters 
what is there. For if a man but desire to eat a roast, the meat 
comes from one land, the salt from another land, the food*™ from 
another land. If these things have to travel till they reach thee, 
thou too must travel till thou attainest what cannot come to 
thee. For the arts have no feet for the butchers to drive them 
after thee; neither can they be put into vats, nor can they be 
nailed up in a barrel. Now as they have this infirmity, thou 
must do what they should do. English Humores are not 
Hungarian, nor the Neapolitan Prussian, wherefore must thou 
go where they are; and the more thou seekest them out and 
the more thou learnest of them, the greater is thine under- 
standing in thy native land. Thus it is also necessary that the 
physician be an alchemist: if now he desire to be one, he must 
see the mother from whom grow the Mineralia. Now the 
mountains go not after him, rather must he go after them. 
Now where the Mineralia lie, there are the artists: if a man 
wish to seek out artists in the analysis and preparation of 
nature, he must seek them in the place where the Mineralia 


8°“ Parabolani” originally meant reckless fellows. At the time of Para- 
celsus, the term was applied to those who, regardless of their own danger, 
went out to tend the sick, particularly in times of pestilence. Cf. Du Cange, 
Glossarium mediae et infimae Latinitatis .. . V1, Niort, 1886, p. 155. 

Soa “ die Speiss,” Huser, p. 176. 


28 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


are. How then can a man find out the preparation of nature, 
if he does not seek it out where it is? Should I then be blamed 
because I have wandered among my Mineralia and learned the 
temper and heart, and grasped in my hands the art of those 
who teach me to separate the pure from the dross, by which 
I anticipated much evil? Nonetheless I must also repeat the 
philosophic saying, that wisdom is despised only by the ignorant ; 
thus, too, art by those who do not profess it. 

I say nothing of other matters: that he who goes hither and 
thither makes the acquaintance of many people, experiences 
all kinds of behaviour and customs that another would eat 
his hat and shoes to see. I say nothing of greater things than 
these. Does not a lover go far to see a beautiful woman? How 
much further for a beautiful art? Now did not the queen come 
from the end of the sea to Solomon only to hear his wisdom? 
Now if such a queen pursued the wisdom of Solomon, what was 
the reason? It is this: that wisdom is a gift of God. Where 
he gives it, there should one seek it out. Thus too where he 
has placed art, there should it be sought. It shows great per- 
ception in man that man is reasonable enough to seek the gifts 
of God where they lie, and understands that we are obliged 
to go after them. If then there is an obligation here, how can 
one despise or spit upon a man who carries it out? It is true, 
those who do not thus, have more than those who do: those 
who sit in the chimney-corner eat partridges and those who 
pursue the arts eat a milk-soup. The corner-trumpeters wear 
chains and silk: the wanderers can scarcely pay for ticking. 
Those within the walls have it cold and warm according 
to their wishes; those in the arts, were it not for a tree, would 
have no shade. Now he who would serve the belly, he follows 
me not; he follows those who go in soft raiment, although 
these are unfit for wandering. For Juvenal has written of 
them that only he roams happily, who has nothing. Therefore 
they consider the same saying and, that they may not be 
murdered, they just remain in the chimney-corner and turn 
pears. I think it praiseworthy and no shame to have thus far 
journeyed cheaply. For this I would prove through nature: 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 29 


He who would explore her, must tread her books with his feet. 
Scripture is explored through its letters ; but nature from land to 
land. Every land is a leaf. Such is the Codex Naturae; thus 
must her leaves be turned. 


Tue Firtru DEFENCE 


CONCERNING THE REJECTION OF FALSE PHYSICIANS 
AND FALSE COMPANY 


As nothing is so pure as not to be defiled with flaws, it is 
necessary that one should make known the defiled and the pure, 
for it is proved also in medicine that there is more evil than 
good. As Christ, however, had twelve disciples and one of 
them was a traitor, how much more credible is it among men 
that of twelve scarcely one is good? The reason is that while 
we should do all things for love, yet nothing is done for love 
but only for the sake of squaring and payment, from which 
comes selfish gain of which false physicians are born to medi- 
cine, so that they seek money and admit not the commandment 
of love. Now when a thing has selfish gain for its aim, the 
arts are falsified, and the work too; for art and craft must 
come from love, else there is no perfection. For in the same 
way we have two kinds of apostle; the one loves Christ for 
his own gain, wherefore was the purse of selfish gain given 
to him. Therefore he had his reason, for his selfish gain to 
sell Christ himself, and for his selfish gain to send Him to 
His death. If now Christ had to suffer Himself to be sold and 
betrayed for the sake of selfish gain, how much more do the 
false physicians make man lame and crooked, strangle and kill 
him, in order that their profit be increased and not hindered. 
For as soon as the love of one’s neighbour grows cold, it can 
bear him good fruit no more; and such fruit as is borne is for 
selfish gain. Thus should we know that there are two kinds of 
physicians: those who act for love, and for profit, and by their 
works are they both known. Thus are the true ones known 
by their love and the just fails not in his love for his neigh- 


30 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


bour. The unjust, however, the same as act against the com- 
mandment, reap where they have not sown and are as rending 
wolves ; they reap because they wish to reap, in order that their 
profit may be increased, ignoring the commandment to love. 

Christ gives examples: how the pearl was bought, how too 
the field was bought with the treasure, that is to say that love 
is not in the many but in the small. As though he were to say: 
If thou art a physician, thy pearl is the patient and he is the 
field in which the treasure lies. Now it follows from this that 
the physician should sell what he has and heal the sick: thus 
acts love of one’s neighbour. Where, however, it is not so, 
but thou keepest what is thine and takest also from the sick 
his, now is scripture nowise followed, wherefore can no art 
appear to perfection in medicine. For we must keep before 
our eyes how the bag of gain was awarded to Judas and the 
other apostles were forbidden to have bags, but to eat what was 
put before them. Such offerings as these come from love: 
demanding, importuning, begging, are not allowed. For one 
thing, what we should receive from our neighbour is left to 
love, and is not left to our might. Wherefore it follows from 
this that to those who walk in the way of God, perfect works 
and fruits grow of their talents which God gave them. Those, 
however, who do otherwise than Scripture shows, the same 
are surrounded with much lamentation and misery, as well as 
those from whom they seek profit. Unless it be that God works 
in the neighbour against the art and medicine of the false 
physician; otherwise no patient is cured at their hands. Let 
no one be astonished that I cannot praise gain in medicine. 
For since I know how very ruinous profit is, so that the arts 
are by profit falsified and directed only to appearances and 
purchase, and that this cannot come to pass without falseness, 
—which falseness causes corruption in all things—therefore 
should the physician not grow from profit but from love. This 
last is without care, cares not what it will eat tomorrow but 
considers how the lilies of the field are clothed and the birds 
fed, much more the man who walks according to the will of 


God. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES Sil 


But since in medicine such useless folk are involved who seek 
and consider only profit, how can it be that I admonish them 
to love, or how can it have any effect? I for my part am 
ashamed of medicine, seeing to what utter deceit it has come. 
Indeed, there is not a desperate henchman, brothel-keeper or 
dog-killer but wants to sell his human, or dog dripping for gold 
and heal all diseases with it: though their conscience proves 
that they are allowed to cure but one disease among them all. 
But in consideration of their own profit they accept everything 
that comes to them. Thus too come all the lazy and profligate 
rascals into medicine and sell their medicine, whether it makes 
sense or not. Now he who can fill sacks with gold, he is praised, 
he is a good physician. Thus the apothecaries too and some 
barbers take medicine upon themselves, behave and carry on 
as though it were a woodcart, go into medicine against their 
own conscience, forget their own souls, if only they become 
rich, prepare house and home and all that belong in it, and 
dress it up! They heed not that it came undeservedly into 
their hands, if only it is there! And it has become a doctoral 
custom—where scripture sanctions it as right, I know not— 
that a visit should cost a gulden although it be not earned; and 
that there be fixed fees for the inspection of urine and other 
things. That one have compassion with one another and 
fulfil the commandment to love, such things do not become use 
or custom. Neither is there any more law, but only grab, grab, 
whether it makes sense or not. Thus they receive golden chains 
. and golden rings, thus they go in silk raiment and thus display 
their manifest shame before all the world, which they deem 
an honour and well suited to a physician. To walk around thus 
decked out like a picture is an abomination before God. 

Is it not just that one should shame oneself of a profession 
which is used so completely in contradiction to its own nature, 
by such incapable persons? Although the art in itself is a great 
treasure of nature, it is not given any consideration by such 
incapable persons. Thus are many who take up medicine, and 
each one wishes to use it and not to know it. They are thieves 
and murderers, they enter not by the right door. Their art 


32 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


is idle talk and barking, the term supports them, and their 
knavery and deceit drive them from one land to another, but 
not back again. It happens to them as to a messenger who 
brings strange news; wherever he goes, he gives the same 
sermon; when he returns, he is heeded no more. 

It is a grave and pitiful thing, that such an art should be full 
of such incapable, careless persons and be thus rendered false, 
so that one believes not the truth in it; and that it should have 
come to the point when their knavery is so utterly manifest, 
that none of us is of good report but all of us are thought 
alike, —-which in some ways I cannot take amiss. The reason 
is: Since the Jews, as a wortliless deceitful people,*” employ 
medicine and are supported by the pharisaic, who then should 
think anything of a profession which is controlled by such 
knaves? And as long as one wishes to ride all horses with one 
saddle and recognises not disease in its essence, rather, what 
comes into each man’s head, is his art, there is yet no experi- 
ence nor truth established. But the reason why such things 
happen is this: the world desires to be deceived. Therefore 
must medicine be manned by such knaves by whom the world 
may be deceived, for a pious man does it not. But if the world 
did not wish to be deceived, medicine would be manned by 
others. But as the world is in some ways of little or no account, 
she cannot tolerate the pious in her presence; therefore must 
like things be arranged with like. Is it not just that a man 
should be ashamed to be numbered and named among such 
knaves? Not only that they rummage around in medicine but 
also that they are content to display their arrogance; thus they 
claim to know and to understand all Religiones; they claim 
authority to punish or to praise all things; they boast of know- 
ing all languages and when one examines it, it is sealed with 
bunkum. One says: the heavens effect such things and the 
firmament is the cause. I too know something of the firma- 
ment, but I cannot find in it that the falseness in medicine is 
born of the firmament. But this I know well, that man’s 


8eb Cf, Introduction, p. 7. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 33 


carelessness is a cause of deceit and one needs accuse no one 
of it but oneself. No longer is anyone willing to journey to 
become a master. Each wants to fly before his wings have 
grown. This is the deceit: everyone acts, but knows not what. 
This is the carelessness that is in man, that he undertakes a 
work knowing that he cannot do it. So, however, the false 
physician thinks : If it succeed not, (as will indeed happen), thou 
canst well vindicate thyself and defend thy knavery with God, 
or lay the blame on the patient : thus they must give thee money, 
whatever happens. Medicine is an art which should be employed 
with much conscientiousness and much experience, also with 
much fear of God; for who fears not God, murders and 
steals for ever and ever; who has no conscience, has no shame 
in him either. It is a wicked shame, or perhaps a calamity, 
not to recognise such godless people and to cut down a tree 
which is of no use, and throw it into the fire. For this is how 
they are: since they see the leniency of the authorities and see 
too that they sometimes love profit, they are after it like whores 
by the moat. Therefore is it necessary that a distinction be 
made between the physicians who walk according to the law 
of God and those who walk according to the law of man. The 
one serves in love, the other for profit. Thus I desire to have 
defended myself in this place, that I have nothing in common 
with the Pseudo-physicians, nor do I favour them, but would 
further the cause of felling the tree. It need not for my part 
be long delayed. 


Tue SitxtH DEFENCE 
To Excuse His StranGE MANNER AND WRATHFUL WaAyS 


Not enough to attack me in various articles, but I am said to 
be a strange fellow with an uncivil answer, I do not wash up 
to the satisfaction of everyone, I do not answer everyone’s 
contention in humility. This they consider and deem a great 
vice in me. I myself, however, deem it a great virtue and would 
not that it were otherwise than it is. I like my ways well 
enough. In order, however, that I may justify myself as to 


4 


34 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


how my strange manner is to be understood, pay heed: I am 
by nature not subtly spun, neither is it usual in my country to 
attain anything by spinning silk. Neither are we raised on 
figs, nor on mead, nor on wheaten bread, but on cheese, milk 
and oatcakes. This cannot make subtle fellows; besides what 
one received in youth sticks to one all one’s days. The same 
is almost coarse to the subtle, the cat-clean, the superfine. For 
those who are brought up in soft raiment and in the women’s 
apartments, and we who grow up among fir-cones do not 
understand one another well. Therefore must the coarse be 
judged coarse, though the same think himself utterly subtle 
and charming. Thus it is with me too: what I think is silk, 
the others call ticking and coarse cloth. 

But pay heed further how I justify myself in this accusa- 
tion that I give a rough answer. The other physicians know 
little of the arts; they resort to friendly, pleasing, charming 
words; they advise people with breeding and fine words; they 
set forth all things at length, delightfully, with distinct differ- 
entiations, and say: Come again soon, my dear sir; my dear 
wife, go and accompany the gentleman, etc. I say thus: What 
wilt thou? I have no time now; it is not so urgent. Now I 
have upset the applecart! ** They have made such fools of the 
patients that they are completely of the belief that a friendly, 
affectionate manner, ceremony, ingratiating ways,** much ado, 
constitute art and medicine. They call him ‘ young sir’ who 
only comes from the shopkeeper’s; they call another ‘ Sir, 
wise Sir’ who is a cobbler and a dullard, where I say ‘ Thou’ ; 
but with this I throw away my resources. My intention is to 
gain nothing with my tongue, but only with works. As they, 
however, are not of this opinion, they can well say in their 
way that I am a strange, queer-headed fellow, that I give little 
good advice. I do not believe in feeding myself on friendly 
caresses, wherefore I cannot use what befits me not, nor what 
I have not learned. For it is not necessary to use such flattery 


$1 Huser, p. 183: “Jetzt hab ich in den Pfeffer gehofiert,” which defies 
literal translation. 
32 Cf. Sudhoff (1915), p. 37, footnote. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 35 


and to deal tenderly with every boor ** who is not fit to be 
carried in a dung-barrow. Medicine should be such, that the 
physician may answer according to his flesh and blood, his 
country’s customs and his own nature: rough, rude, stern, 
gentle, mild, virtuous, friendly, delightful—according to how 
he is by nature and by acquired habit. But let this not be his 
art, but only the briefest answer. And on with the works! 
That’s the way to oil the wheels! ** 

Thus I consider in this respect I am sufficiently defended. 
Still, it happens that I have other strange ways, for instance 
towards the sick, if they do not follow my prearranged injunc- 
tions. Anyone can judge that such strange ways are not 
unjustified, in order that medicine may be found true, the 
patient become well, and I may still remain without blame. 
A turtle-dove would grow angry with such lousy muddle-heads. 

There is a further complaint against me, with regard in 
part to the servants who have left me, in part also to my 
Pupils, that none of them could stay with me because of my 
strange ways. Now note my answer: the hangman has taken 
from me into his favour one and twenty servants, and removed 
them from this world, God help them all. How can a man 
stay with me, when the hangman will not leave him with me? 
And what has my strange way done to them? If they had 
fled the hangman’s way, that would have been true art. And 
there are yet some who have thus kept with me and have also 
fled the hangman; and in rejecting me, they have excused 
themselves, for I was strange, no one could cope with me. 
But how should I not be strange, when a servant is no servant, 
but a master? He looks for his advantage, ruins me with it, 
brings shame upon me, and rejoices in it. Thus they lie about 
me to the patient, they receive them behind my back, without 
my knowledge and consent, make a contract with them for 
half the money, say they know my art, have copied it from me. 


83 Cf. ibid., p. 38, footnote. 

** Huser, p. 184: “das heist dem Rappen Muss in das maul gestrichen.” 
The phrase cannot be rendered literally. For meaning, cf. Schweizerisches 
Idiotikon, VI, 1909, col. 1169. 


36 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


After such disloyalty they cannot and would not be with me, 
nor the patients either. Afterwards, when I hear of it, the 
knavery is a bargain. Let anyone judge how honest the bargain 
is! Doctores, barbers, bath-keepers, pupils, servants and lads 
too, have done it to me. Should this make a lamb of me? A 
wolf should result in the end! Moreover, I must go afoot 
while they ride. For this comforts me always, that I linger 
and remain when they run away and their falsity is understood. 
Not less do the Doctores complain about me and not without 
justification. For telling the truth hurts the one whose cunning 
is revealed. How many, however, are there who for this speak 
good of me? —they too are Doctores. Thus are the apothe- 
caries, too, inimical to me; they say I am strange, eccentric, 
etc., no one can do right in my opinion. Yet to me, everyone 
can do right who acts righteously. But as for giving Quid 
pro Quo, Merdum pro Musco **—it suits me not to acknowl- 
edge the Quid pro Quo book of the travelling scholars, to accept 
it nor yet to allow its use. Besides, of what they give me them- 
selves, not a third is good, sometimes indeed none is good. 
And the same is sometimes not what they say it is. Should 
I subject my patient to the Quid pro Quo, even if it is no good? 
Thus should I come to shame, my patients to disaster, perhaps 
even to their death. When I proclaim this in my native way, 
which I consider and deem very friendly, the idlers ** call it 
an angry, strange manner. Other Doctores do not thus, I alone 
do so. And furthermore, I write short prescriptions, not forty 
to sixty ingredients, I prescribe little and seldom, I do not 
empty their boxes for them, I do not bring much money into 
their kitchens. Yet this is the business for which they calum- 
niate me. Now judge for yourselves, to whom do I owe most? 
Or to whom have I pledged myself as Doctor? To help the 
apothecary empty the bags in his kitchen, or the patient from 
the kitchen to his benefit? Now behold, dear sirs, how strange 
I am and in what a plight is my head! If I should defend my 


85 Cf. Introduction, p. 7. 
8° T.e. dung for musk. 
87 Cf. Sudhoff (1915), p. 39, footnote. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 37 


angry manner to the end, they would blush with shame and 
be frowned upon. For to tell of those who thus accuse me and 
criticise me because they think thus to belittle me, will bring 
too much of their knavery to light for them, and will greatly 
damage them with all pious judges and interrogators. If I 
were now to attack some barbers and bathkeepers a little and 
make public what they have against me, why they call me 
eccentric and a strange man, I rather think there would be 
few of them and they would fare very much as some others 
have fared whom I have mentioned. Wherefore, understand 
me in this sixth defence, that you who hear such things may 
please to measure them with true judgment and true balance; 
and remember that not everything comes of a pure heart, but 
from filth with which their mouths run over, to glorify them- 
selves and to belittle me. 


THE SEVENTH DEFENCE 


How I Too Know Not Att, CAnNot anp Am Not ABLE 
TO Do WHat EacH ONE NEEDS, or Micut NEED 


This I must confess, that I am not able to grant and fulfil 
every one’s desire, as he certainly and undoubtedly would 
have it from me: this I cannot do, nor is it in my power. For 
God did not create medicine thus according to their will, that 
it might act immediately according to the will of all comers. 
If then God will not grant nor give such people anything, how 
can I help it? For I cannot master nor overpower God, but 
He me and all others. Thus are all answered alike: if they were 
agreeable to God or pleasing to him for healing, He would 
not have withdrawn nature from them. It is the same thing 
as one who thinks himself a fine, handsome fellow and wants 
to stand out before all others and wants all women and maidens 
to favour him. But he was born crooked, has a hump on his 
back like a lute and in other respects too he has no comeliness 
of body. How can women favour one whose own nature does 
not favour him, but spoiled him in his mother’s womb and 


38 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


made nothing good of him? In order, however, that I may 
instruct you the better, know ye that if God bestow no good 
on a man, how then should nature bestow good on him? Where 
both favours are absent, of what good is the physician? And 
who can blame him? Now they say when I come to a patient, 
I know not immediately what ails him, but I need time to find 
it out. It is true. That they judge immediately is the fault of 
their foolishness; for in the end the first judgment is false 
and from day to day they know the longer, the less, what it 
is, and make liars of themselves. Whereas I desire to approach 
from day to day, the longer, the closer to the truth. For with 
hidden diseases it is not as with the recognising of colours: 
in colours one sees well what is black, green, blue, etc. But if 
there were a curtain before it, thou also wouldst not know. 
To see through a curtain requires effort where there has been 
none before. What the eyes see can well be judged hurriedly, 
but what is hidden from the eyes it is in vain to conceive as 
though it were visible. Take an example from the miner: 
however good, true, ingenious, clever, he may be, when he 
sees an ore for the first time, he knows not what it contains, 
of what it is capable, how it should be treated, whether to 
roast it, to smelt it, to refine it, or to burn it. First he has to 
filter it, try a few tests and experiments, and see what to do. 
Then when he has sieved ** it well, he can start on a definite 
line: that is the way, thus must it be. So is it too in the hidden, 
tedious diseases: an opinion cannot be formed so quickly— 
(unless it be by the humorists). For it is not possible to find 
a dog so quickly, nor a cat in the kitchen; how much less so 
in a dangerous, secret business? Wherefore, considering, judg- 
ing, testing things as much as is necessary to the experiment, 
is not to be taken amiss. Then to it with the true art: that’s 
the fine thing, that’s the valuable thing, that’s how to treat such 
diseases. But the humorists do not test by experiment, but 
by the Reader’s enquiries and Proofs. Wherefore many escape 
to the churchyard before they find out, and even then they do 


88 Cf. ibid., p. 41, footnote. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 39 


not find out. Thus is their art; and should such an art judge 
me? I cannot do everything. What can they do, who think 
nothing is of value but what is cured by the Summa,” i. e. their 
Avicenna, their Rabbi Moises.*® Short work, whatever the 
result: these are their Aphorismt, which end very abruptly in 
the churchyard. 

Why do you throw it in my face if I cannot cure impossible 
things, when you cannot cure the possible? But rather you 
ruin it, so that I must build it up again. How can I cure a 
cut-off heart, put a cut-off hand back on? Who has ever been 
able by the light of nature to join death and life and unite 
them, so that death should receive life? Indeed it is not 
natural, but divine. How should I do such things when you 
cannot heal wounds in which there is no death, except what 
you invite? You are long-sighted, you see into the distance, 
but not yourselves near by. I will prove it with your conscience, 
that it teaches and instructs you, that you do and act against 
it and would glorify yourselves with that which brings you to 
shame. For you have medicine from God, with which to 
drive out all things possible; you could do it, and are incapable. 
Why then do you accuse me of doing nothing for impossible 
diseases and that for them no medicine is given me, nor 
created? Know then further the conclusion of this defence. 
How can I cure possible things when it is hailing in the apothe- 
cary’s shop? When the storm strikes the kitchen, who can 
eat of it? How can a fur coat be for shots and armour for the 
cold? How can I cure with Quid pro Quo with which you ruin 
all your patients? You need luck to be successful with Quid 
pro Quo and to complete the cure. Who can accomplish with 
false drugs that for which the true only are fitting? Who 
can complete what he intends shall be done with green herbs, 
when he is given mouldy ones? Who can bear to be given 
Succum Tithymalli for Diagridium? ** Who can bear or suffer 


°° Byrckmann, p. 48. Cf. Sudhoff (1928), p. 412. 
*°T. e. Maimonides. 
“1 T.e. the juice of spurge for scammony. 


40 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


to be given Picem Calceatorinam distillatam pro oleo bene- 
dicto,” and cherry mush mixed with Thyriac for a Mithni- 
datum? ** And if I should tell the truth about your Simplicia 
and Composita, as necessity requires, where would it lead me? 

With this I desire to have defended and protected myself 
for the last time until further provocation, which, if God will, 
will also be returned blow for blow. 

And herewith too I desire only to beg that the pious and 
just of true conscience should not bother themselves with my 
writings. For necessity required that I answer. For Christ too 
replied and was not silent. For everyone should know that 
answering is just and fitting, in order that those do not stagnate 
completely nor blind themselves with idle talk, who live on and 
enjoy idle talk. If they were not answered, they would win 
the argument and would consider themselves right, and there 
would afterwards be even more error, rubbish, disaster and 
corruption. Wherefore is answering equivalent to anticipation 
of present and future corruption and a revelation of what the 
ranters are. For such reasons as these then I have been pleased 
to answer and to protect myself from all those whose hearts 
are full of ill-will, that both sides may stand revealed. For it 
is necessary that vices come; but woe unto him through whom 
they come! That is to say, it is necessary that liars speak con- 
trary to the truth; but woe unto them, for truth reveals the lies. 
If they were silent concerning their vices, truth too would be 
silent. But since it is necessary, lies and vice cannot, and may 
not, be silent; it must be uttered, but woe unto them. Thou, 
reader, however, shouldst consider and measure all things most 
justly, that thy reading may bear thee fruit, profit and good. 


42T.e. distilled cobbler’s pitch for oleum benedictum, which latter was a 
complex remedy. 
48T e. a complex antidote. 


SEVEN DEFENSIONES 41 


CoNCLUSION 


And so, Reader, hast thou to some extent understood me 
in this reply and seen well that I have attacked with all mild- 
ness. And by thyself mayest thou well be able to judge what 
frivolous and useless folk say and do. Thou mayest also 
remember that all this started only with physicians and then 
think with what manner of people medicine is supplied, what 
an unequal pair are Podalirius ** and Apollo, and now those 
of today. Would not nature itself perhaps be alarmed at such 
conditions? For nature knows her enemy very well, as a dog 
knows a beater of dogs. Holy Scripture sufficiently proves 
with what praise medicine should be lauded and with what 
honours the physician. But it stands to reason that there the 
reference concerned Hippocrates, Apollo and Machaon, who 
healed with the true spirit of medicine, performed Prodigia, 
Signa and Opera and appeared as lights in nature. My simple 
head can well understand that Holy Writ did not mean those 
who are without works, the ranters, nor the Mercenarios, but 
those who have trodden in the footsteps of Machaon. It is good 
to note in the above writings that there is pain and toil on 
earth. But I consider that if the authorities had thus learned 
well to recognise these things and had lain sick in the same 
hospital, there would be more friendly attention to neighbourly 
love. The laudable province of Carinthia has kept it in mind 
and represents Maecenas, and gives Asylum Hippocraticorum 
in our times, protecting and sheltering. For this may God give 
recompense, peace and unity. Amen. 


44 Byrckmann, p. 51. 








ths Waki 
Lol HERP Re, Peel Ge! 


are 


? oane ory 


: A } 
a ® 
DEA | 
; 
>. 
) 
Ai 
' 
a 1 
| } 
ie ’ ' “un 


ty 


TCT cane ee 
ik aia 
rae : I wy 


MAT Os PE teh} hy peta Jewel 4 
’ a y 
Ang Lae 
on ' 
' 
7 
PRY s 
jt 
Ay bby 
*? 
tt hey 
a md 
‘ i 


II 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS AND OTHER MINERS’ 
DISEASES 
BY 


THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 
CALLED PARACELSUS 


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, WITH AN INTRODUCTION 
BY 
GEORGE ROSEN 


wh afey Pia, 


ae 
4 urate sy 


R ae ae 
Pease) 
Ne a 
ual oa a 
2 a on i by 
ant i" 


" 





INTRODUCTION 


The labouring classes have always been a fundamental factor in 
the social and economic organization of society. Their work at 
any particular time has been performed within the framework of 
an existing productive system. Certain problems, flowing from 
their functional relationship to their jobs, their communities, 
and in a larger sense their entire environment, are especially 
characteristic of the working classes. In this category the 
problem of occupational disease occupies an important and 
prominent position. Such diseases are the result of the noxious 
aspects of industry, which impinge upon the worker in the 
course of his activities. 

The diseases incident to certain occupations attracted atten- 
tion very early. Mining, as one of the most dangerous of all 
industries, was one of the first to be investigated with regard 
to occupational disease. Mining is one of the most fundamental 
technological disciplines of civilization. Without it our civiliza- 
tion could not exist. The raw materials, which are necessary 
for even the simplest industrial processes, can be secured in 
sufficient quantity, only by digging them out of the bowels of 
the earth. This is not a modern development, however, for 
evidences of mining operations are to be found among the 
earliest human cultures. The history of mining extends in 
unbroken continuity from neolithic times to the present. Just 
as old, however, is the history of occupational disease among 
miners. A miner’s life has always been a dangerous one. 
Besides being exposed to various traumatic accidents, his health 
and life are endangered by the deleterious environment inci- 
dent to his occupation. 

Nevertheless, despite scattered references in the literature 
of antiquity to this subject, it was not until 1567 that the first 
monograph, devoted to the occupational diseases of miners, 
appeared at Dillingen in Germany. The author of this work 
was Theophrastus Bombast von Hohenheim, usually known as 
Paracelsus; the book was entitled Von der Bergsucht und 


45 


46 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


anderen Bergkrankheiten (On the Miners’ Sickness and other 
Miners’ Diseases). 

During his life of trials, tribulations and struggles, Para- 
celsus had ample opportunity to become acquainted with the 
mining industry of his day. He was instructed in chemical 
and metallurgical principles by his father. When his father 
moved from Einsiedeln to Villach in 1502 his opportunities 
increased. Villach was surrounded by numerous mines and 
smelters, a fact, which Paracelsus corroborates in his Chronik 
des Landes Kaernten. ‘“ Die im Lande Kaernten sind die ersten 
die in diesen teutschen Landen gewesen, was da angetroffen 
hat die Metalle, die Vitriole, die Erze u. dgl. Sie sind erstlich 
in diesem Lande gelernt worden und dann in andere Lander 
getragen und sind dort Bergwerke nach dem kaerntischem 
Brauch in das Werk gebracht worden.” * Paracelsus increased 
his knowledge of metallurgy in a practical manner. In his 
work Von der grossen Wundarzney he relates that from his 
20th to his 25th year he was employed in a smelting plant at 
Schwaz, in Tyrol. During his journeys through Denmark and 
Sweden, and later in Meissen and Hungary, he learned about 
the mines in these countries. Around 1533 he passed through 
the industrialized Inn valley, which contained many mines, 
and it is likely, as Sudhoff suggests, that the hygienic condi- 
tions in the mines and the occupational diseases of the miners 
awakened his interest then. Again in 1537 he came into con- 
tact with the mining industry, when the management of the 
Fugger mines called him to Villach to take charge of the 
metallurgical work there. This evidence is sufficient to show 
that Paracelsus had enough opportunity to study the mining 
industry and its workers thoroughly, and to observe the dis- 
eases of the miners, particularly the effects of various minerals 
and metals on the human organism. 

The monograph of Paracelsus was probably written around 


1“ Those in the land of Carinthia were the first in these German countries 
to discover metals, vitriols, ores and the like. The knowledge of these 
matters first developed here and was then carried into other countries 
and mines were developed there according to the Carinthian usage.” 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 47 


1533-34, but this is by no means certain. Sudhoff has expressed 
the opinion that a visit to the mines and smelterworks of the 
lower Inn valley, in the Tyrol, during 1533, stimulated Para- 
celsus to write this monograph and that he completed it in 
1534. It is possible, however, according to Koelsch, that 
Paracelsus did not write the book until 1537-38, during which 
time he was employed in the Fugger mines at Villach. At any 
rate it did not become known until after its publication in 
1567 and its influence did not become apparent until the next 
century. It was published posthumously—Paracelsus died in 
1541—by the editor Samuel Architectus (Zimmermann). 
Nothing is known concerning the manuscript used by Archi- 
tectus, but there is no doubt concerning the authenticity of this 
work. 

The monograph, Von der Bergsucht, etc. consists of three 
books, each containing four tractates. The first book deals 
with the diseases, mainly pulmonary affections, of miners, 
whereby etiology, pathogenesis, symptomatology and therapy 
are successively discussed. The second book treats of the dis- 
eases of smelter workers and metallurgists, and the third con- 
cerns itself with diseases caused by mercury. As this brief 
outline indicates Paracelsus attempts a monographic descrip- 
tion of the peculiar morbid conditions, which afflict mine and 
smelter workers; this exposition is based upon a consideration 
of the etiological factors involved. The theoretical conceptions 
employed by Paracelsus in this work can only be understood 
within the bounds of his general doctrines. It is very likely, 
however, that his theories were profoundly influenced by his 
experiences in, and his knowledge of, the mining industry. 
Nevertheless, just as Paracelsus and his ideas cannot be under- 
stood without an analysis of his background, of Galenic, i.e. 
Greek and Arabic, medicine on the one hand, and of medieval 
German mysticism on the other, his account of miners’ dis- 
eases cannot be fully comprehended without a knowledge of 
his teaching. His monograph on miners’ diseases is a direct 
application of certain general ideas on etiology and patho- 
genesis as expressed in his Opus Paramirum. We have here 


48 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


a very interesting example of the interaction of several factors 
to produce a specific result. Influenced by his mining experi- 
ence, Paracelsus was led to certain generalized ideas on path- 
ology and etiology. To demonstrate the validity of his teach- 
ing, he turned to a definite disease group, and employed his 
theories to explain the facts that he observed and the therapeu- 
tic measures to be employed in the treatment of these maladies. 
The work that resulted was Von der Bergsucht. 

Paracelsus considers the miners’ sickness (die Bergsucht) 
to be a disease of the lungs, like “the old and long known 
lung sickness.” “ The miners’ sickness is . . . the disease 
of the miners, the smelters, the pitmen and others in the mines. 
Those who work at washing, in silver or gold ore, in salt 
ore, in alum and sulphur ore, or in the vitriol boiling, in lead, 
copper, mixed ores, iron or mercury ores, those who dig such 
ores succumb to the lung sickness, to consumption of the body, 
and to stomach ulcers; these are known to be affected by the 
miners’ sickness (bergsuechtig).’’ Apparently Paracelsus knew 
nothing of any previous references to the subject of miners’ 
diseases for he states, “that nothing is found about these 
diseases in the old writers. For this reason they have remained 
undescribed until now, and the cure too was omitted.” 

The origin of the disease of the lungs is to be sought in 
the air, for “the air is the body (corpus) from which the 
lung receives its sickness.” The chief element of the air is the 
chaos (gas), but this chaos is in turn ruled by the stars. 
Therefore the physician must concern himself with these 
sidereal influences, with the constellation of the stars. At the 
first glance anyone who reads this work, may have the impres- 
sion that these “ constellations’ are conceived by the author 
in an astrologic sense. This view, however, is false, and is 
soon corrected if the reader is willing to take the trouble of 
delving somewhat deeper into the ideas of Paracelsus. 

Paracelsus regards man as a product of nature. Nature is 
the macrocosm, man the microcosm, and the former influences 
the latter. This influence is exerted indirectly by means of 
the astral constellations since they determine the state of the 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 49 


“upper firmament,” which for Paracelsus includes all kinds 
of atmospheric conditions. Heat and cold, dryness and mois- 
ture are the results of the astral influences and when they act 
on man they can produce disease. The knowledge of these 
meteorologic and climatic conditions and of their influence 
on man is therefore essential for the physician. Paracelsus 
calls this knowledge astronomy. 

While considering these physical factors, Paracelsus also 
mentions another factor, a chemical one, which plays a role 
in the causation of the miners’ sickness, namely the poisonous 
effects of metals, when they are extracted. He compares the 
poisonous action of minerals and metals, such as arsenic to the 
action of the stars in the chaos. 

Paracelsus then goes on to discuss the pathological changes 
in the respiratory organs in cases of miners’ sickness. He con- 
ceives these changes as being “ exudations,” of “ tartarus.” 
This theory of the “tartarus ” diseases was erected by Para- 
celsus and plays an important part in his medical thought. 
The “tartarus’”’ concept, however, was not invented by Para- 
celsus, but was current among those acquainted with alchemistic 
principles. It had been introduced into Europe from the Orient 
in the 13th century and is mentioned by Albertus Magnus. 
Tartarus or tartarum was a general term comprising all forms 
of precipitation or sedimentation. Paracelsus employed this 
concept to explain a large group of pathological processes by 
means of simple physico-chemical principles, such as coagula- 
tion, precipitation, sedimentation and deposition. However, 
the “tartarus ”’ itself was not a simple substance, but a mixture 
of mercury, sulphur and salt. These three substances are not to be 
considered as identical with the modern elements and compounds 
of the same name but rather as the three basic categories of 
matter, of the macrocosm and microcosm. These categories 
describe the reactions of substances when exposed to heat; 
sulphur is that which burns, quicksilver that which evaporates 
when heated, and salt that which resists heat. There are as 
many kinds of mercury, sulphur and salt as there are 
substances. 


5 


50 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


The second tractate of the first book is concerned with 
“the origin and birth of the miners’ sickness.” Paracelsus 
enumerates the various climatic influences which are harmful 
to the miners’ health. The miners become overheated while 
working and catch cold easily. The relation between sweet 
and sour beverages and pulmonary disease as presented by 
Paracelsus is unclear. He reasons by analogy very often, and 
Koelsch suggests that he may be thinking of odors in the mine 
air, due to the mine gases of putrefaction, or more probably of 
the sweet or sour tastes of various minerals and salts. This 
view is in all probability correct. 

The presence of fat in the chaos also causes the miners’ 
sickness. Fatty vapor is identical with sulphur for Paracelsus, 
and if this sulphur enters the lungs, it remains there as a 
resin. The presence of sulphur in the chaos is not the only 
cause of pulmonary lesions, for there are also mercurial, i.e. 
vaporous, substances in the air. These arise from the minerals; 
therefore it is important for the physician to know and to be 
able to recognize what minerals a particular region possesses. 
The minerals act either as mercury, sulphur or salt and enter 
the lung in these forms. The presence of these components 
varies, however, according to the nature of the minerals 
present in the different regions. These differences are reflected 
in the three types of the miners’ sickness. Paracelsus again 
emphasizes the importance for the physician of a knowledge 
of meteorology, geology and mineralogy. This knowledge of 
the earth and its constitution he calls philosophy. In his diag- 
nosis, examination and treatment the physician must therefore 
employ his knowledge of astronomy and philosophy. 

In the third tractate Paracelsus discusses the signs and the 
nature of the miners’ sickness, and hints vaguely here at the 
therapeutic usefulness of chemistry. At this point Paracelsus 
makes a remark which is very interesting. He reminds the 
reader that “we must also have gold and silver, also other 
metals, iron, tin, copper, lead and mercury. If we wish to 
have these, we must risk both life and body in a struggle with 
many enemies that oppose us.” It would appear from this 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS Da) 


remark that Paracelsus realized fully that the rise of occupa- 
tional diseases among the mine workers was a necessary and 
concomitant result of industrial development. 

In his discussion of the miners’ sickness Paracelsus now 
turns to the action of the poisonous vapors, which arise when 
the ores are roasted, and their effect on the miners. He recog- 
nized that the poison can enter the body either as a solid being 
taken by mouth, or by being inhaled as a vapor. His observa- 
tions taught him, however, that the action of the poison is 
much weaker, when inhaled, and consequently the duration 
and the course of the disease caused by the vapor is different. 
In other words, he realized clearly the distinction between 
acute and chronic poisoning. As an illustration of these state- 
ments he describes the picture of chronic arsenic poisoning 
with the characteristic symptoms, pallor, thirst, gastro-intestinal 
disturbances, and skin eruptions. Finally Paracelsus observes 
that such miners tend more easily to become victims of other 
diseases. 

In order to facilitate and to simplify the study of these 
poisons and their effects Paracelsus arranges them in groups. 
One group comprises the arsenicalia, a second one antimony 
and similarly acting metals and minerals, while the alkali 
group is the third one. It is difficult to identify the minerals 
and ores mentioned under each of these headings and the 
same is true of the symptoms produced by them. When one 
considers that these minerals were not pure metals and that 
the miners were also exposed to other deleterious influences, it 
is not difficult to realize that neither the classifications nor 
the symptoms described by Paracelsus can be defined in terms 
of our present knowledge. Every physician is of course inter- 
ested in nosographic descriptions and it is difficult to resist 
the temptation of attempting to identify them in terms of 
modern nosologic categories. The validity of such identifi- 
cations is, however, highly hypothetical and always open to 
question. Some of these symptoms are probably due to diseases 
of the respiratory organs, either acute lesions, such as pneu- 
monia or pleurisy, or more chronic ones, such as pulmonary 


52 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


fibrosis, tuberculosis, bronchitis with emphysema, or pulmon- 
ary neoplasms. The other symptoms may be interpreted as the 
signs of acute or chronic poisoning, perhaps the cutaneous signs 
were the result of an occupational dermatitis. 

With the mention of the “ arcana” Paracelsus indicates and 
develops his therapeutic theory. The physician who would cure 
a certain disease should not attempt to find a separate remedy 
for each new patient because such a method leads only to 
errors. Instead he must attempt to discover the arcanum which 
will cure all those kinds of disease exhibiting similar symptoms. 
This arcanum or remedy can only be found by discovering 
the cause of the disease, for the cause is also the cure. This 
theory can also be applied to the miners’ sickness for the 
minerals also have their arcana. Having indicated the theoreti- 
cal basis of his therapy, Paracelsus devotes the fourth tractate 
to practical therapeutics. 

The tractate opens with an enumeration of the subjects to 
be discussed—preventive measures, the diet of the miners, 
the treatment of the miners’ sickness, and finally the special 
treatment by means of the arcana. Having indicated the general 
measures for the prevention and treatment of miners’ sick- 
ness, Paracelsus discusses the special therapy of the pulmo- 
nary condition. The therapeutic measures which he recom- 
mends are based on his physico-chemical “tartarus”’ theory 
and on his doctrine of the arcana. The lungs are covered and 
blocked with “‘ exudates”’ of tartarus, which can be removed 
and washed off by profuse sweating. 

The second book deals with the diseases of smelter workers, 
and in the third book Paracelsus concerns himself with the 
diseases produced by mercury. It is interesting to note that 
he devotes one third of his monograph to the morbid condi- 
tions resulting from mercury poisoning. Mercury was mined 
and refined in Tyrol, Carinthia and Carniola, regions with 
which Paracelsus was well acquainted and where he had enough 
opportunity to study these conditions. 

The first tractate of this book is concerned with a descrip- 
tion of the characteristics and properties of mercury. The 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS oe] 


following two tractates deal with the pharmacologic action of 
the metal on the human organism, which Paracelsus attempts 
to explain by means of the “ astronomical physica.” Mercury 
is a “cold” metal and therefore the mercurius vivus produces 
shivering, chattering of the teeth and the like. In the fourth 
tractate Paracelsus attempts to explain the effect of the mercury 
in the body and how the various symptoms arise as result of 
this action. The cold or as he also calls it “the winter” that 
resides in mercury causes “a shivering”? without any frost 
being felt. 

It is very difficult to elucidate the nosographic pictures that 
Paracelsus describes. Clearly not all the things he mentions 
were due to mercury poisoning. Certain signs and symptoms, 
however, are definitely due to mercury; such are tremor, gas- 
trointestinal disturbances, oral putrefaction, cachexia and 
blackening of the teeth. 

The monograph closes with a section on the therapy of the 
mercurial diseases. Paracelsus bases his therapy on the premise 
that the mercury is deposited in the body, sometimes in such 
a stable form that it must first be mobilized before it can be 
excreted. He imagines the deposition of mercury as occurring 
in a mechanical manner, i.e. the mercury settles into certain 
spots, preferably dependent parts, by the force of gravity. 
As soon as any of these spots has been determined, steps must 
be taken to create an opening through which the mercury can 
flow out. This is done by applying a corrosive plaster for 2 to 3 
weeks and producing an ulcer. 

The dead mercury must be revived so that it can pass out 
of the body. For this purpose Paracelsus recommends baths, 
either with herbs or with sulphur. It is of interest to note 
that this form of therapy is still used at the present time. A 
separate chapter is devoted to the therapy of the oral and 
dental complaints, such as putrefaction in the mouth (stomati- 
tis), blackening, shakiness, and loss of the teeth and strong, 
stabbing pains. 

Finally mention should be made of a fragment containing 
two chapters, which was first published in 1589 by Huser in 


” 


54 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


his edition of the collected works of Paracelsus. The fragment 
is concerned with spirits in mines and their possible harmful 
effects on the miners. In view of the general acceptance of the 
existence of such spirits in the mines it occasions no surprise 
to find that Paracelsus also includes this subject in his mono- 
graph. Another reference in this fragment to lightning and 
thunder in the mines may be interpreted as the expression of 
the author’s experience with mine explosions, but the entire 
passage is vague so that a definite opinion is not possible. 

Paracelsus’ monograph was only a beginning but there can 
be little doubt that it was an important one. Sudhoff has 
remarked that this work is unique in the literature of the 16th 
century, and this very fact is one of the major reasons for its 
significance. It is the first monographic presentation of the 
diseases of a definite occupational group, the mine and smelter 
workers. Paracelsus was not content with authority and 
aprioristic speculation but demanded that nature be investi- 
gated. The numerous correct observations that he made are 
evidence of his own experience in the mines. Paracelsus 
recognized two large groups of diseases which affected the 
miners of his time, the diseases of the respiratory organs and 
the pathologic conditions resulting from the ingestion or inhala- 
tion of poisonous metals. He knew that the respiratory dis- 
eases were caused by climatic conditions and that they appeared 
frequently in miners with such symptoms as dyspnea, cough 
and cachexia. He recognized the poisonous effects of various 
metals and differentiated acute and chronic poisoning. In the 
case of mercurialism his description is detailed, most of the 
important symptoms being mentioned. 

Paracelsus realized the importance of prophylaxis and insisted 
that “the mine spirits must be forestalled so that they will 
leave the miner uninfected; this is begun, before he becomes 
subject to the mine and the ore spirits.” It is striking, how- 
ever, that Paracelsus does not refer to any protective apparatus, 
such as respirators. In this connection it is of interest to note 
that Paracelsus does not pay any special attention to dust as 
a causative factor in miners’ diseases. It is remotely possible, 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 55 


however, that some of his references to vapors in his treatise 
may be allusions to dust. 

This monograph on the diseases of miners exerted a definite 
influence on the development of this branch of occupational 
medicine. For the next 150 years after the appearance of this 
work every writer on the subject referred to Paracelsus. Some 
treated his book favorably, others criticized it mercilessly but no 
writer failed to touch upon it. 

The great significance of this monograph lies not only in 
the circumstance that it is the first comprehensive account of 
the diseases of any occupational group, but also in the attempt 
of Paracelsus to relate these diseases to the general body of 
medical knowledge and theory. In judging his work due 
regard must be paid to the disadvantages under which he 
laboured. It should be remembered that Paracelsus lacked any 
clear cut theoretical concepts and an adequate terminology with 
which to express his ideas. By writing in a vernacular tongue 
this difficulty was only increased. Consequently in order to 
present an adequate theoretical explanation of his observations, 
he very often reasons by analogy. Parts of his book are there- 
fore rather obscure for the modern reader. 

The present translation attempts to represent both the thought 
and the style of Paracelsus as far as it is possible in English. 
It is based upon the text in Sudhoff’s edition of the collected 
works of Paracelsus (Abt. I, Band IX). Several other works 
were consulted to elucidate obscurities in the text. The com- 
mentary of Koelsch and Sudhoff’s recent biography of Para- 
celsus were very helpful in this respect. B. Aschner’s transla- 
tion into modern German was also consulted, although it 
deviates considerably from the original text at times. 


56 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS AND OTHER MINERS’ 
DISEASES 


THREE Books 


by the very experienced philosopher and physician 


PuHiLtie THEOPHRASTUS vON HoHENHEIM 
THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAINING FOUR TRACTATES 


Of the first tractate, the first chapter. 


In order to describe the disease of miners’ sickness, it is 
first necessary to uncover the old and long known lung sick- 
ness, and how this occurs. The birth and origin of the miners’ 
sickness are to be understood in a similar manner. These 
two diseases differ only in the element and in the location, but 
their course is the same. Now the lung sickness is a disease 
of the lungs and just as it is possible for it to spread further in the 
body and to poison it, thus it is also possible for the miners’ 
sickness to do so. In the first book, namely in the first tractate, 
follows the description of the birth of the lung disease, and how it 
arises. It is mentioned briefly, as much as is necessary for an 
understanding. After this has been understood, the second 
tractate follows in which is described the birth of the miners’ 
sickness. After this knowledge follows the third tractate con- 
cerning the appearance and nature of the external and internal 
body together, in this disease. And in the last tractate the 
cure of the same miners’ sickness, and everything that is neces- 
sary for it are described. 

In order, however, that you may know what the miners’ 
sickness is, it is the disease of the miners, the smelters, the 
pitmen and others in the mines. Those who work at washing, 
in silver or gold ore, in salt ore, in alum and sulphur ore or 
in the vitriol boiling, in lead, copper, mixed ores, iron or mer- 
cury ores, those who dig such ores, succumb to the lung dis- 
ease, to consumption of the body and to stomach ulcers; these 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 5A 


are known to be affected by the miners’ sickness (bergstichtig). 
Know further that nothing is found about these diseases in the 
old writers. For this reason they have remained undescribed 
until now, and the cure too was omitted. Because man, how- 
ever, is a discoverer of the origin of such diseases he can 
explain them by the light of nature; therefore a description of 
this disease is presented in the four following tractates. And 
although it is such, the lung sickness, as it may be called in 
German or in Latin, has not been described and explained 
correctly, as the light of nature in it proves. Even if they say 
that their proofs demonstrate what the disease in itself is, yet 
their proofs are considered in philosophy as something full of 
holes. Therefore know that the birth of the miners’ sickness is 
like the origin of the lung sickness, as I indicate it. For the 
birth of the miners’ disease is a testimony of the errors of the 
ancients in the writings on the lungs. 


The second chapter. 
On the birth and origin of the lung sickness 


The matters are so to be understood, that you should know 
that the air is the body (corpus) from which the lung receives 
its sickness, and that outside of the physical air nothing harm- 
ful is added to the lung. Take an example, someone drinks 
and this drinking turns out to be harmful to the lungs. This 
injury does not arise from the drink, but from the air that 
is contained in this drink; it is drawn into the lungs and is 
consumed there. Every element has its own stomach in the 
body and in this stomach its element must be consumed. Thus 
the air is consumed in the lungs. And in the same manner as the 
stomach digests its food, one part being taken for the use of the 
body, while it excretes the other, thus it must also be understood 
of the air, of which the one part is also consumed, and the other 
part is excreted as an excrement. The air must be discussed, and 
it is entirely to be understood like a food, and as it is possible 
that food produces diseases, thus it is also possible for the air 
to give birth to these things. Therefore it is not necessary here 


58 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


to describe anything else, but only to explain the chaos’, since 
it alone is the element that should be taken for comparison 
here. In the same manner as you see that a chaos lies between 
heaven and earth, which produces all the diseases of the lungs, 
their fevers, ulcers, consumption, plethora, cough, gasping, and 
oppression together with all the other kinds. Man must nourish 
his lungs with this same chaos. Now the chaos is governed by 
the power of the stars. It is therefore subject to their rule over 
it, and as this species of ruled chaos is given to the air, thus does 
it impress itself on the lungs. 

This is now the basis from which the physician should recog- 
nize the diseases of the lungs, that they are there through 
the power of the stars in the same manner as a disease which 
is due to a food. There are also as many species in the chaos, 
which make man sick, as many as grow in food; they are 
also as well or as badly cooked as food. And just as it is 
possible to prepare false dishes with food, thus is it also to be 
understood of the chaos. As the example now proves, the 
chaos lies between heaven and earth as a food for the lungs 
in the same manner as the growths of the earth are food for 
the stomach; that is why similar fruits grow above the earth 
for those who live between heaven and earth. Now under- 
stand too, that there is also a chaos in the earth which rules 
the lungs of those who live in the mines. And as those on the 
earth become lung-sick through their chaos, so do those 
become lung-sick, who are subject in the mines to the earthly 
chaos. Thus the names differ according to the elements, namely, 
lung-sickness for those who are on the earth, and mine-sick- 
ness for those who are in the earth. The consequence of this 
is the right to write another book. The upper heaven in its stars 
is the one that cooks the air, which lies between it and the earth. 
Likewise there are the mineralia of the earth the heaven and the 
stars, and they rule their chaos in the same manner as the outer 
heaven its chaos. And in the same manner as you see that 
arsenic can kill us, thus there are stars which kill like it by intro- 


1 Gas. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 59 


ducing the chaos. These are the stars about which more must be 
written, how they produce the diseases of the lungs, insofar as 
it is possible for the air to poison its stomach. 


The third chapter. 


In order that you may understand the cause of asthma as 
quickly as possible, know then that the heaven is the element 
fire and that its elemental movement produces the chaos which 
shall be discussed here. And in the same manner as water is 
brought to boil by fire, the chaos is that which is boiled by the 
element of heaven. And just as the meat in water gives up its 
strength to the water, so the stars are like the meat and give 
their strength to the afore-mentioned chaos. And just as the 
soup from the meat is food for man, so the chaos, of which we 
are speaking here, is also food for man. Just as the food is 
digested in the stomach and has its special gullet, thus the 
chaos is digested in the lung and it also has its own gullet. 
Just as the things, that are placed in water, have their proper- 
ties and make people sick or healthy according to them, so do 
the stars, that are placed in the chaos also produce a soup that 
is healthy or unhealthy. For this is the soup in which the 
plague is prepared, that enters through the lung tube and which 
proceeding further according to its anatomy, flies like a 
bird to its nest. If God had not determined at the beginning, 
that some should be protected and leave children behind whose 
seed should remain, who would have remained blessed then? 
Know then also concerning the lung-sickness that it comes 
through the power of the stars, in that their peculiar characters 
are boiled out, settling on the lungs in three different 
ways: in a mercurial manner like a sublimated smoke that 
coagulates, like a salt spirit which passes from resolution to 
coagulation, and thirdly, like a sulphur which is precipitated 
on the walls by roasting. In the same manner as you see a 
clean barrel, that is filled with clear wine in the fall and the wine 
has no palpable and congealed components. But at the end of 
the year, when the wine is poured out again, these three kinds 


60 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


mercury, sulphur and salt are found to have settled on this 
barrel; this is the winestone (tartarus). Thus in the same 
manner, just as there is something in the wine which was not 
seen in it, there is also a body (corpus) in the chaos, which 
attaches itself to the lungs, as to its barrel, and which then 
hardens there like a mucus in its viscosity, after which the 
coagulation starts, which is the matter of the lung sickness. 


The fourth chapter. 


I do not want to describe the species of the lung sickness, 
but what has been reported here is an instruction, so that you 
will understand concerning the heaven and the chaos and that they 
are also in the earth. That is to say that those who are instructed 
in the philosophy of the earth will also explain the lung sick- 
ness, since in its origin and rise the miners’ sickness shares 
the species and the rise of the lung sickness, which is why the 
one explains the other and allows it to be understood. Anyone 
who has been instructed concerning the terrestrial diseases, also 
knows those in the firmament. One who writes correctly con- 
cerning the diseases of the firmament will also hit upon the 
diseases of the earth correctly. One who does not strike the 
earth will also shoot astray in the heavens. The physician 
should be so grounded in the light of nature, that he not only 
knows seven stars, but all the stars that the firmament 
contains. He doesn’t stop with this knowledge, since he also 
knows the earth if he knows this, and therefore also the other 
two elements in their astronomy and philosophy. Therefore 
know further, just as the chaos is born, so is the earth a 
heaven of this generation, and the minerals that lie in the earth 
are the firmament of this heaven. Fire arises out of this element 
of the earth and makes a chaos in the earth of the same kind 
as the chaos between heaven and earth. And this same chaos 
becomes a soup of its minerals in the same manner as the exter- 
nal chaos is a soup of the stars. Now such people as seek 
and make their dwellings in the earth must carry on and 
nourish their lungs with the chaos that is there. And that 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 61 


which has been cooked in the chaos is the mineral impression, 
is the tartarus of the lung, which I call the miners’ sickness here. 
And therefore the mode of origin (modus generandi) is the 
same process in both diseases, which ends according to the three 
kinds of mercury, sulphur, and salt, the type depending on the 
definite property contained in this flesh. It is well to consider 
this point, that this chaos acts in two kinds of bodies; since you 
know that the Earth’s own inhabitants were made for her, just 
as we were made from Adam to live in the air between heaven 
and earth, just as you also know similar things about 
the nymphs. The chaos of the earth has been given to the 
inhabitants of the earth as air, the chaos of the water as air 
to the nymphs, they live therefore from this air. The one 
body is that of the inhabitants of the earth; for this I recom- 
mend the Archidoxa and the books Paramiris. But it should 
be understood, the other body is that of people who become 
inhabitants in the mines, and they are not people of the earth. 
From which it follows that the human chaos must be carried 
with them into the mines, since their lungs are maintained 
by their chaos, that is by the human chaos. But there it comes 
to a mixture of the earthly and the firmamental, and the two 
kinds become as one there, just as in a marriage; now the 
individual is suited for this constellation of the earth, from 
which constellation the miners’ sickness takes its origin. 


THE SECOND DRACTATE 


ON THE ORIGIN AND BIRTH OF THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 


The first chapter. 


The origin and the source of the miners’ sickness are con- 
tained and described in the second tractate. First experience 
in these things should be made known, so that the things which 
give rise to the cough, the gasping, and the lung sickness with 
all its additions can be recognized and found through examina- 
tion and clear discernment. The theory of the two sicknesses, 


62 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


of the lung and of the mine, is divided according to the content 
of this experience. In the same manner that you may compre- 
hend the things which visibly demonstrate that they make the 
lung sickness, thus they are also to be discovered according to 
ascertained philosophy, to be present in the influence that was 
described in the first tractate. You see that fogs grow externally 
in the chaos between the heaven and the earth and these fogs act 
in different ways, some of them producing asthma, coughing and 
short-windedness. Now this is the experience which teaches us 
to comprehend that the fog is the cause. Thus because the fog 
has its origin in the firmament, there is also a fog in the mine, 
from which the miners’ sickness can arise even more severely 
than from the external one. Now if the cause of this fog should be 
sought, it can be found that it comes from the sphere Galaxae; * 
those that make it are also in the earth. Now the mineral 
of such a fog is also a cause, and the recognition of this mineral 
gives the knowledge of the cure in the same way, just as a knowl- 
edge of fire tells us with what it can be extinguished. Thus 
must all diseases be recognized, whose cure is then possible. 
For this reason too death is incurable, since the heaven of this 
constellation has never been found. 

Therefore know further, just as it is to be understood con- 
cerning the fog, thus it is also with rain, frost and the like, 
including also such a winterly cold, from which short-winded- 
ness can likewise arise. These things are all to be considered 
in the mines. 


The second chapter. 


Now to speak further of the things, which make asthma, such 
as cold and heat; for instance, a large heated lung, which is 
cooled with sudden cold, is also attacked by short-windedness, 
as also through sour beverages and through sweet ones. Now 
just as such a sudden cooling of the lung, as well as sour and 
sweet, make short-windedness, thus is this also to be under- 
stood in the mines, in that the work produces a heat in the 
lungs, and the neighboring cold, which penetrates into the 


2? Milky way. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 63 


chaos, causes a rapid cooling of the lung after the work is 
finished. Although the cold is not felt, it is still essential in 
the alant and in the constitution® of the earth and its effect 
is such as if it had been drunk. The same is also to be under- 
stood concerning the acid. As you see that a sloe encloses 
its acid with a skin, thus the acid of the mine is also enclosed 
by a covering in the earth; and because we make dwellings in 
the mines we walk in this acid. Now the one acid comes from 
vitriol, the other from alum, as it can also be understood 
concerning the sloes and currants. The conjunction can arrange 
that the things, the acid and the like, are attracted into the 
chaos of the earth and the lung is eager for them; now 
it is injured in the same manner as one who has a special 
desire to eat chalk or another to drink vinegar and there are 
very many such desires. Thus just like these desires it attracts 
to itself, now the alum, now the vitriol, now the saltpeter, 
etc., and when the lung loses this desire, it fares like a sick 
person, whose desire turns out for the worst. Thus this acid 
causes hoarseness of the lung, like vinegar or a sour drink, 
and afterwards it is possible for short-windedness to arise. 
Just as you have now been instructed concerning the acid, thus 
should you also understand concerning the sweetness, which 
lies enclosed, like the sweetness in the currants; and as we walk 
in the mines, it is the same as if we ate this sweetness. When 
we eat the thing of the earth, the same thing happens, as 
if one were to eat currants with the teeth, the only difference 
being that the sweetness of the mine is ingested in the chaos. 
And when the desire misleads the lung, this sweetness produces 
the miners’ sickness, the cause of which will be related in 
different places. 


The third chapter. 
Now the things are to be dealt with, which permit the external 
recognition of hoarseness, among which one is fat. If the lung 


has a desire for fat, it must expect harm from it, which then 
shows itself. Now there are several kinds of fat that we eat, 


3 Character of the earth. 


64 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


from oil, meat or fish, visible or invisible. For this reason 
several lung sicknesses are found, since some become hoarse 
from this fat, others from another. Now that the eyes may see 
and comprehend, nature teaches that fat is also found in the 
chaos, under the sun, and also in the earth. Now every fat is 
nothing but sulphur that is divided in different forms and ways. 
From this it follows now, that the stars show their action in 
such matter in the same manner as the vapor from the intes- 
tine burns after being lit, and it is only an exhalation. Thus 
the chaos is also furnished with a fixed sulphur. If this sulphur 
is seized by the lung, it attaches itself to the latter like a resin 
externally to a tree. And according to the different types and 
kinds of minerals, different resins arise in the lung; this resin 
is the complaint and the cause of the miners’ disease. Now 
the cause, why the chaos becomes a resin, which indeed is not 
its ultimate matter, is that the lung cannot digest it. In the 
same manner one recognizes, if the stomach digests poorly 
that it is weak; due to which various things can happen to it, 
and such things also happen to the lung here. In order that 
you may understand this sulphur in the chaos, take this 
example: you see the sheet-lightning during a thunder storm; 
now no sulphur is to be seen at the spot, but if it burns 
sulphur must be there. And it is possible for this lightning to 
blind, and if moisture were not innate in the chaos, it would 
burn down the houses. Now if this is possible and compre- 
hensible, then such lightning can also come visibly, or also 
invisibly into the mines, and as it is possible for that which is 
visible to cause harm, then it is likewise possible that that 
which is invisible can also do so. Since just as a sudden exhala- 
tion which strikes into one can turn the lung to resin, thus 
it is also possible that such a vapor arises from the minerals, 
a thing which is often seen in the heavens. 


The fourth chapter. 


Now if this alone is the cause, that sulphur lies in the chaos, 
it is this that injures the lungs, as has been indicated; in the 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 65 


same chaos there also lies an admixed mercurial smoke, which 
gives the chaos its density and removes its transparency. It 
acts, as if a suddenly rising vapor of mercurial arsenic entered 
into one, for any such vapor produces a permanent, intense 
hoarseness; such a vapor also lies in the chaos and often, in 
addition to this one, still another is born. In the same manner 
sulphur lies in the chaos of the world, and to this the lightning 
is added. Thus two injuries are recognized. Understand also, 
that in the earth there is always a constant mercurius like 
arsenic as well as an accidental one due to the daily constella- 
tion. For the minerals are like the stars in the firmament. For 
this reason recognize what minerals the particular region 
possesses, since this is the influence; thus if Cachimia* were 
there, sulphur arises from cachimia. And just as if you wanted 
to say, the land lies under the Virgin, and just as the astrono- 
mer recognizes his stars and what the destiny of each is to be, 
thus does the earthly philosopher also recognize to what this 
mine inclines or which constellation is present. For the one earth 
bears its Marcasite, the other its antimony, and thus whatever 
the region contains produces the chaos of which we have 
already spoken. And just as the astronomer says this star exerts 
its influence, so too does the philosopher say there is orpiment in 
the earth from which this influence arises. And therefore the 
physician arises and speaks thus: This miners’ sickness is a 
resin, which was born out of the chaos, and in which the star 
and the mineral orpiment are boiled. From this follows that 
the properties of all kinds of minerals should be recognized. For 
the sulphur of the marcasites is white and red, the sulphur of 
talc is yellow, red and black, the sulphur of cachimia is brown 
and black, the sulphur of pure antimony foam, the sulphur of 
marble, the sulphur of tufa, the sulphur of amethyst, and many 
others which it is not necessary to mention. And just as you 
have understood concerning the sulphur, thus you also have a 
mercury of copper, a mercury of lead, a mercury of ore which 
has already been roasted, a mercury of zinc, a mercury of arsenic 
and the like. And in the same manner as you have understood 


* An imperfect metal. 


6 


66 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


concerning mercury and sulphur, it is also to be recognized con- 
cerning salt (sal). For there is Sal Vitrioli, Sal Aluminis, Sal 
Entali,’ Sal salis Petrae, Sal salis communis, Sal salis Gemmae, 
and many others. This salt, this sulphur and this mercury are 
spiritus, which are the chaos itself, their nature accordingly 
corresponding to the particular region. 


The fifth chapter. 


Notice therefore concerning the spiritus, that the mercury 
yields a soot. Thus this spiritus also acts in the same manner 
as a sublimation which produces the ultimate matter. For this 
reason its miners’ sickness is dry and lean and the spiritus 
sulphuris gives its resin and the spiritus salis its tartarus; these 
are the three chief types of the miner’s sickness. Now although 
marcasite has one name, it is no less also cachimia, so that the 
former is not to be understood as being only of one kind. For 
the changes of the earth also change the minerals, as you see that 
the forms of countries change. Although an herb has the name 
cepa,® still it often has another form in another region and yet 
is still cepa. If now the form is different and changes somewhat, 
know then that the property in nature also changes due to the 
earthly power and also is differently changed in other parts 
of the same country. Therefore the physic of the same country is 
more useful than a foreign one. Thus like is healed by like, 
even if nature is vexatious. For just as much must be given 
to the minerals as to the heaven which rules the stars, 
thus also the earth and the minerals. And heaven and 
earth are two similar heavens, and the minerals and the stars 
are two similar stars. Therefore whichever is recognized in 
the one, is also recognized in the other. For this reason the 
physician begins with astronomy and ends with philosophy. 
For astronomy gives him the constellation of the firmament 
and of the minerals, and philosophy indicates the properties, 
both of which are necessary for the cure. Since man is a 
microcosm, he must be recognized through externals, and the 


5 The salt of solid saltpeter. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 67 


new moons, the exaltations, and the like are not only to be sought 
in the planets but also in the terrestrial stars. For if lunaria can 
demonstrate themselves in their course, then it is an indication 
that there are also more lunaria, just as there are also other 
things, which visibly demonstrate and present the heavenly 
course. Thus this tractate will now be ended, in which was 
described how the miners’ sickness arises out of the three kinds 
of minerals, i.e. from their spiritibus, which are in the chaos 
that emanates from the minerals, like a voice from the mouth. 


THE THIRD TRACTATE, 


OF THE FIRST BOOK, CONCERNING THE SIGNS AND THE 
NATURE OF THE EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL BODY, 
AND HOW THE DISEASE ARISES 


The first chapter. 


Now in this tractate the work of the disease, how it 
arises, is to be dealt with; since man has a fragile life, and 
there are many things that kill him, from which he cannot 
protect himself even if he knows about them, therefore it is 
necessary to relate that which must happen through the physi- 
cian, who has this at his command. For this reason God has 
created him, in order that he should recognize and explain the 
fatal kind, how nature strives against nature, how one thing 
in nature opposes another in the same manner as the animals 
on the earth band together against each other. For man 
should know this, that in the insensible things there is a uni- 
form enmity. For the exhalations of such minerals also kill 
us in the same manner as the crocodile with his breath cor- 
rupts and kills man. However, because God has created good 
and evil, which cannot possibly exist next to each other and 
yet do exist united, he has set the physician in his place, 
in order that he may point out to mortal man the enemy who 
seeks his body and life, so that he will know how to protect 
himself. For just as the doctrine by means of which we know 


68 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


the devil, the enemy of the soul, comes from God and through 
the prophets and apostles, thus has he also indicated the enemy 
of the body, so that man may recognize by the light of nature 
what is poison, what evil, what good, and what is useful for 
him so that he may retain his long life. In order that the 
poison which is in the good should not break his life, he has 
given the physician knowledge to indicate good and evil in a 
thing, and subsequently he instituted Vulcanus,’ so that good 
and evil can be separated from each other by means of this 
art. This art is like death, which separates the eternal and 
the mortal from each other, and this art should correctly be 
known as mors rerum; for that which should do nothing comes 
from that which should do something. Consequently it is 
right to describe the things that we may neither eat nor drink 
without worrying about the enemy, without worrying about 
the air around us, if we do not protect ourselves in winter and 
summer when we plant and raise our own poison in the gar- 
den. Besides we must also have gold and silver, also other 
metals, iron, tin, copper, lead and mercury. If we wish to have 
these, we must risk both body and life in a struggle with many 
enemies that oppose us. If we also want to have other things 
which we are forced to utilize for our healthy life, then there 
is nothing which doesn’t bear our enemy within itself. Because 
so much lies in the knowledge of natural things which man 
himself cannot fathom, God has created the physician. Now 
out of the word arises the knowledge of the light of nature, 
and by it he can discover the good, and also recognize the good 
in the evil which is useful for healthy life. And in the same 
manner as the devil is driven out of man, the poisonous dis- 
eases are expelled by means of such physic, just as evil expels 
evil and good retains good. 


The second chapter. 


Therefore it is necessary to discuss the miners’ diseases, 
and to present the things from which they arise, as was 


® Allium cepa = onion. 7 The art of alchemy. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 69 


indicated in the former tractate. Now our physic is in 
mercury, sulphur and salt, and our poison is also in these 
three things ; for they both exist together. Thus we find through 
mortem rerum *® that that which can help us in our distress, 
also has in itself that which created our distress. For example: 
Imagine a miner who looks for silver until he finds it, now he 
has an ore. Now it follows from this that because he seeks the 
ore and handles it he acquires his disease, which cannot be out- 
side the earth, but only on the earth. Now if he has the disease 
and takes the same ore that he has hewn and allows the silver to 
be smelted from it, he finds in that which escapes the same thing 
that made him sick; thus he also finds by refining that which can 
make him healthy. Know therefore, that the vapour which 
escapes from the ore has the same poisons in it, as those which 
escape from the silver during smelting. For a rose can produce 
its odor and make us faint through its odor, while the body of 
the rose remains unharmed, therefore know the power of 
emanations when they enter into man. Although the body 
of this poison is not there, the agile poisonousness is 
there with such a weakness, that it drives man into a long 
sickness, which would be short if the body itself were there 
instead. For example: If arsenic is ingested there is a rapid, 
sudden death ; if however the body is not taken, but its spiritus, 
the latter makes a year out of an hour, i. e. whatever the body 
accomplishes in ten hours, the spiritus does in ten years. Also 
there does not occur as terrible a death as when the body itself 
is present. Know that anyone who wants to acquire knowl- 
edge of the miners’ diseases must know the rapid disease and 
the death that is produced by the body itself, with all the 
properties and signs that arise through the body. By these 
signs he can recognize what type of miners’ sickness it is, i.e. 
the spiritus of which body is acting; thus the signs are recog- 
nized. For example: The taking of realgar produces a dried- 
up lung; by reason of this dryness the breath is changed to 
shortwindedness; together with this a blanching of the face 


® The death of things. 


70 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


appears. Fissures and crevices arise in the liver, and together 
with them an unnatural thirst which corrodes and grinds up 
the folds in the stomach, so that they peel off like the bark from 
a tree. At the same time a pressure arises in the epigastric 
region, and a difficult and hard digestion. This is followed by a 
high fever, palpitation and tremor in the region of the heart, 
subsequently an eruption on all the limbs, then the quinsy and 
an accompanying sickness of the head. 

Therefore observe, what these effects of the poison are and 
with which disease they appear. Thus over many years and days 
the spiritus of realgar also produces such a uniform disease, 
which depends on the previously. reported accidents. Such in- 
fected miners tend easily, according to the courses of the 
external heaven, to all heavenly diseases, such as fever, con- 
sumption, to raving madness and the quinsy. 


The third chapter. 


Thus after the effect of the poison has been reported, how it 
causes the disease, it is necessary in this tractate to recognize 
the signs that come from the bodies, as it is written above; 
there are so many of them that their number cannot be counted. 
But notice briefly, that under realgar, are understood and com- 
prehended all the arsenicalia, including also the operimentiva.® 
Anyone, however, who can easily fathom the separate species 
because he has had much experience for a long time in these 
diseases, can distinguish and divide the spiritus with greater 
certainty. The treatment will be discussed in the chapter on 
realgar in which the arcana will be explained. If, however, the 
cure should be detailed, it is necessary to specify these exactly, 
as the humoralists do. Thus just as there are various species 
of realgar, there are also species of antimony, to which marcasite, 
cachimia, talc, pure antimony foam and the like belong. For 
if the poison antimony is taken, it produces a dry, barren 
cough, sharp stitches in the side, headache, constipation, 
an ulcer of the spleen, heated blood, scabs and itching, drying 


® Yellow sulphide of arsenic. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 71 


up and increasing jaundice. As far as the signs of the 
above mentioned minerals are concerned they are to be ascribed 
to the spirit of antimony. You should also know that under 
the name alkali many minerals drive their spiritus into man 
in a poisonous manner; thus in the chapter on alkali the signs 
of this death are given: it causes difficulty in breathing, foul 
odor out of the mouth, and throws out much mucus, produces 
heartburn as if it were in the stomach, causes diarrhea, griping 
in the stomach, and aching in the belly, dries up, causes 
the lungs and the stomach to putrefy, splits the liver and the 
spleen, melts the kidneys and makes the urine sharp; through 
its devouring corrosion it causes the region of the kidneys to 
putrefy, expels pollutions and also blood through the urine, 
and where diseases lie in such places and limbs, they are moved 
and driven outward. The species of the blue and the white 
vitriol belong to the alkali, and the three species aluminis 
rochi,*° scissi,’* plumosi,’” also the species salis communis, gem- 
mae, silicis and whatever else belongs with them. Now observe, 
after this instruction, the differences between these ores, accord- 
ing to their species. For there is a realgar of gold, of silver, 
of iron, of copper, of tin, an antimony of gold, silver, iron, 
etc. and also an alkali with the same differences. It is neces- 
sary to know these differences because of the cure, and also the 
type of the country should be considered. For the eyes demon- 
strate great differences in these simplicibus, for instance the 
Hungarian region and the Styrian region are different in their 
characteristics, but ultimately have the same metals. Thus too the 
Etsch mountains and the Inischen mountains are in a different 
class than the high mountain of Meissen** and the same is 
also to be understood of others. And they differ even more 
than Rauris and Gastein, than Pinzgau and Pongau, and even 
more than two galleries side by side. Such things are rec- 
ommended to experience, without which these diseases can- 
not be understood. And it is useful to have seen all the corpora 


1° Mica. 4 Crystallized alum. 72 Talcum. 
18 Mysnia = Meissen; Etsch and Inischen Mountains are in Tyrol. 


72 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


as they are found in their species, to have observed their action, 
and how they produce their evil and poison. For the marcasitic 
sulphur prevents sleep, the vitriolic sulphur produces sleep unto 
death. Thus there are also vexatious salia and also mercurialia; 
this I recommend further for the experience of each one. 


The fourth chapter. 


And although there are many enemies so that the physician 
cannot indicate their number, yet it is not necessary ; for anyone 
who would want to compute such things would introduce too 
many errors into his practice. For the practice is such that it 
fights against the disease with the Arcanum. Observe therefore 
how you are to understand the arcanum: you know that there 
are various arsenicalia and the like which arise from gold; now 
whoever wants to make a special prescription for each of these 
species, departs from the arcanum and produces serious errors, 
but he who attempts such and considers the gold, approaches 
the arcanum; for good heals evil, which stands next to it. 
For instance: whatever causes jaundice, also cures jaundice.** 
It is thus: good and evil are in the same thing, the jaundice 
arises from the evil, and when the good is separated from the 
evil, the arcanum against jaundice is there. And therefore it 
receives the name arcanum, because out of the same evil many 
kinds of jaundice can arise. Now whoever wants to consider 
each jaundice separately does not know what the arcanum is; 
for the arcanum cures all these species. If the specialist 
(particularis medicus) wants to seek a special diet and a special 
prescription for each one, he will seek too long to be able to help 
the patient. Thus according to the type of this cure and order is 
the origin laudani, i. e. materiae perlatae, which is the same as ifa 
pearl is extracted and this pearl cures the disease which arose 
from its evil. For the physic which should cure paralysis must 
come from the same thing that caused the disease. Now if one 
acts according to the arcanum, the worry concerning the many 
species of the same disease is removed. Thus the arcana are 


4 Homeopathic principle. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 73 


also comprehended here in the minerals, e. g. gold is also a physic 
for all the diseases that its miners acquire. Thus Saturnus 
also has his arcanum for the diseases which arise from lead 
within him, and all else is also to be understood in the same 
manner; what can be harmful through our hands, can also be 
made into physic by our hands. And whatever is impossible for 
these arcana will further be found to be impossible. In the same 
manner as we see that stab wounds and other wounds can bring 
about death, whereby no advice and no help can be found, so 
too the minerals penetrate the limbs of life, so that they can 
be compared with such deadly wounds and stab wounds. Thus 
I now wish to close this tractate in which that with which 
we dealt has been explained sufficiently. For this reason, now 
that asthma has been sufficiently recognized, how it arises 
between heaven and earth, followed by the origin of the miners’ 
disease in the earth and how far such poisons act confusedly, 
these things must be left, and the cure of such diseases must be 
explained. 


THE, BOURTH TRACTATE, 


CONCERNING THE CURE OF THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 
AND ITS NECESSARY PARTS 


The first chapter. 


Now in order to consider the welfare of the miners so that 
they can be protected from the aforementioned miners’ sickness 
it is no longer meet to speak with the learned men and the 
philosophers, but with experienced men; for it is the manner 
and the innate custom of any experienced man not to confront 
another experienced man with idle talk. The health of the 
patient is considered in few and short words by the experienced, 
since the words of idle talk cannot cure. They cannot please 
the patients either, nor can the latter love these words. 
Experience is so constituted, that an understanding of its 
works makes itself known to everyone without much gab. For 


74 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


this reason, more attention should be paid to practice to deter- 
mine what it is. It should be left alone, and this experience 
should defend itself and the results which should move every 
unbeliever to believe in physic should be examined. For the 
results are so clear, that they are not in need of any disputation; 
what these are, will be considered later. However, each one 
should retain his own experience; for who can or wants to 
fathom the end of medicine? For the school of medicine exists 
and is constituted without an end. 


The second chapter. 


Now I will first deal with the articles of the miners’ diseases 
divided into chapters. First the mine spirits must be forestalled 
so that they will leave the miner uninfected; this is begun 
before they become subject to the mine and the ore spirits. 
Secondly it is good to know that the organs of man, the lungs, 
the liver, the kidneys, the stomach, the viscera etc., as many as 
the body contains without exception, are poisoned by the 
ore spirits in the course of time; they devour the chief organs 
in the body whereby these begin to putrefy. Now this putre- 
faction cannot be cured by replacing the lost part; but how it 
may be prevented without any further harm, like an estiomeni- 
cal wolf*® injury, is presented with its preventive measures 
below. Thirdly there follows, since it belongs to prophylaxis, a 
separate chapter on diet and its arrangement, by which man can 
maintain himself so that he does not through any cause make 
himself subject to the ore spirits. Fourthly, the natural cure 
with medicaments and powers, which dispels the natural asthma, 
is to be described, since this is also the cure of the miners’ 
sickness, for which the prescriptions are mentioned below. 
Fifthly there is the cure with the arcana; as it has been men- 
tioned how everything good has three kinds of marcasites, in 
order to dispel the three kinds of evil. Finally the close of the 
first book. 


2° Devouring wolf. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 75 


The third chapter. 


On the preservative of youth 


Understand this by means of an example: The heaven is that 
which infects us by means of its astrum, to the extent to which 
it has been assigned to harm us. Now we cannot withstand it, 
for it is not our power, that is we cannot forestall the influence. 
Just as we cannot prevent the rain or the snow, we must also 
let the action of the ore spirits proceed. But observe this: 
Just as a roof is found in the rain and a shade in the sun, thus 
in the same manner a chimney will be found through which the 
effect cannot penetrate. Understand this therefore: Everyone, 
who is still free from infection, is maintained thus by means of 
the Essentia Tartari, taken and used once every month, together 
with a good sweat; the prescription is as follows 


Rec. Liquoris tartari 3 1j. 
Olei Colcotarini 9 j. 
Laudani purissimi 35 fs. 


to be mixed and administered up to the weight of three barley 
corns.** It can also be that according to the health of the com- 
plexes once in a half year is sufficient, but this is left to the dis- 
cretion of the experienced physician. Moreover Perlatum Auri 
is better than this and all else. 


The fourth chapter. 


On the other preservative against putrefaction 


For those who have been attacked by putrefaction, as des- 
cribed above, Manna calabrina perlata is best. Now Manna is 
every sweet substance that is extracted from each thing; this 
manna is of the species Balsami, for this reason the type and 
the power which do not allow putrefaction are present. By 
means of this Manna the body must be protected from putre- 
faction and it must resist alone the destructive putrefaction 


18 Used as a small weight. 


76 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


of the miners’ sickness. Now it is further necessary to dis- 
cover this Manna, and one is in vitriol, one in urtica ** also one 
in magnete. These three manna are the balsams which prevent 
putrefaction here, as is indicated. Now their extraction is as 
follows: the manna vitrioli is extracted so long by means of its 
phlegma until it acquires the sweetness of honey and a brown 
color. The dosage is one drop in aqua veronicae every day. The 
description of manna urtica is as follows; it is alkalized, then 
rectified so long by means of ventrem equinum until it acquires 
an oily consistency, at which time it is supposed to be free of all 
dross. Then four drops should be taken every day as indicated 
above. The extraction of manna magnetis is as follows, it is 
placed in alcohol, covered with an equal weight of limatura 
chalybis ** and then glued together with lutum sanguinis *° 
in a glass vessel and boiled in the oil of iron dross for 
one month. Then the limatur is taken from the magnets 
and this same limatur is digested with rectified wine until the 
wine becomes red. Then the wine should be separated from 
the red substance and the manna magnetis remains on the 
bottom; it does not allow any important organ to putrefy and 
is used as has been indicated above concerning vitriol. 


The fifth chapter. 
On the nature of the diet 


Although it has been the usage of physicians until now to 
prescribe food and drink, it has none the less been in diseases 
which they understood, and such will be conceded to them and 
left out of the discussion. However, here in the miners’ sick- 
ness it cannot be introduced, since its cause is another heaven, 
not the external upper heaven, but the heaven which is the 
earth itself. Therefore know that each heaven must prescribe 
its food in its realm, therefore that which is on the earth 
remains for its upper heaven. But that which the terrestrial 
heaven rules must taken its diet, that is food and drink, from 


1” Nettle. *8 Tron filings. 7° Blood lime. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS Tai 


it. However, because man is not born for this nourishment, 
but for that on the earth, he retains the external regimen 
and protects himself from the external asthmata so that 
the internal one should not be added to the external one. 
Therefore he should protect himself from the things that cause 
asthma, as has been related in the previous tractates, and 
observe also in this connection, that heat cooled in the mine 
with the same water does not produce an external lung sickness, 
but rather miners’ sickness; the same is also to be understood 
concerning the other things. The diet, however, which corres- 
ponds to the type of mine, should be kept together with the 
others, and they should take great care, if possible, to salt their 
food with the salt which comes from the saltpeter that grows in 
the mines and which is boiled and prepared like ordinary salt. 
A salt should also be boiled from alum, to be used in place of 
spices ; for it does not salt, but spices. With this I have indicated 
the salt and the spice that lie in the ores; I leave it to the experi- 
enced man to improve the things and to add more than I report 
and indicate. 


The sixth chapter. 


Now the nature of things should be held in high regard and 
since things must occur in nature, it is necessary that not only 
the authors with their glosses be accepted as trustworthy, but 
that nature be investigated further, for from it comes the correct 
teaching and the correct instruction. Thus one finds in her that 
in asthma only the arcana should be considered and not the 
composita. For this reason, because the arcana are devoted to 
man, they are also to be used in the miners’ sickness. Although 
ruled by another heaven it is still important that man is of the 
upper world and can defend himself by means of such arcana, so 
that the ore spirits cannot withstand him, when the natural 
arcanum is brought into the mineral species. And although the 
mineralia have their own physic just as the surface of the earth 
also has its own, still man depends on both since he subjects him- 
self to the dwellings of both. Now aqua panis porcini ”® is a 


2° Water made of Cyclamen roots. 


78 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


special arcanum which cures every asthma that does not putrefy. 
When the lungs are brought into a diaphoretic ** condition, 
nothing evil is attached to them. Thus too with the liver, the 
stomach and other members. For if they can be maintained in 
a diaphoretic condition, no ore spirit can harm them any more, 
and the damage that it did will be expelled by means of the 
diaphoretic nature. For to that which sweats no mucilage 
attaches itself, no resina nor any tartarus. But if the sweat 
producing power is lacking, the three reported things that can 
cause harm spread not only to one member but to all. For by 
means of the vesica diaphoretica and regio diaphoretica neither 
gravel nor stones are deposited. ‘This diaphoretic species, which 
is treated here very briefly, will be dealt with in other places 
at greater length; for those who have a knowledge of nature, 
but not of practice, the treatment has been sufficiently indicated. 
Whatever else is to be understood in such a manner in the ore 
world follows herewith. 


The seventh chapter. 


Now it is necessary to speak further concerning the matters 
of the internal earth which should also be understood thus, 
that the main thing is to bring the injured members the power 
to sweat, so that they will sweat like a skin, which opens in the 
bath. And it would be the same if they were covered with wine- 
stone like a barrel or with viscous pitch or with alkali, nothing 
would remain on the skin if a sufficient sweat would pass out from 
inside. For this reason only the diaphoretic nature of the mem- 
bers that are covered with these three kinds, realgar, antimony 
and alkali, is considered here. Realgar is the soot, antimony 
is the mucus, or in order that it be better understood, the var- 
nish, and alkali is the tartarus: these are the things which dis- 
turb the air-containing organs. In addition, observe that three 
kinds of arcana perlata can be extracted from the metals, and 
each retains its diaphoretic property, which belongs alone to the 
aforementioned species, so that the air-containing organs can 


21 Sweating condition. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 79 


be brought into their own natural water, by means of which 
water the three aforementioned things are washed off and out 
through the excretory openings.*” Now because the ore dis- 
pensary has no species besides its metals the cure is thus, that 
the vitriol is extracted from the gold and the sulphur by means 
of the (drotten?), and its prima materia should acquire the 
appearance of argentum vivum liquefactum, a brown color, and 
should dissolve in the fluid by itself without being moistened. 
And further, just as you know this about gold, so you can also 
understand with regard to the other seven metals, but the prep- 
aration is different and is sufficiently explained in the book of 
preparation where de morte rerum is treated, so that it is not 
necessary to relate it again here. 


The eighth chapter. 


And if the first tractates will be difficult and strange for 
the ordinary physicians, the cause is that the mines and that 
which belongs to them are also foreign to them, therefore it is 
reasonable that I proceed with experience in the light of nature. 
Since every doctrine comes from God and physic is created 
for the patient, it should not be concealed nor remain hidden. 
Therefore I have acted fairly and properly in the first three 
tractates, but concerning that which I have treated in the fourth 
it can be that some will complain, for the physic is not pre- 
scribed according to the usual order ; to them I give the answer, 
if the usual order were useful it would not have been forgotten. 
However, because the disease remains incomprehensible, it is 
in need of this arrangement of mine; for the results make it 
trustworthy. But I do not doubt that the prescriptions will be 
difficult and very difficult for some to understand. These should 
remain satisfied with the answer, which is thus: for those, who 
are associated with the mines and in the mines, especially for 
the masters of the mines and for those who are experienced 
with metals, enough has been said and they understand it 
sufficiently. For if those understand a thing, whom it con- 


22 Emunctoria. 


80 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


cerns, I consider it sufficient. For how can a silk-embroiderer 
turn a rope-maker with his cords into a silk-embroiderer? 
Therefore everyone should be shown that which concerns him. 
Thus the disease remains for the mine, and the book too for 
the mine, therefore the understanding also is to be acquired in 
the mine. 


The end of the first book of the miners’ sickness. 


THE SECOND BOOK OF THE MINERS’ DISEASES 


concerning the smelters, refiners and silver refiners and others, 
who work with metallic fire. 


THE FIRST TRACTATE 
ON THE MATTER, WHICH HARMS SUCH PEOPLE 


The first chapter. 


Each thing, which is thrown into the fire has two kinds 
of components in it, a fixed one and another which is transient. 
Now we don’t have to talk about the fixed body here for noth- 
ing harmful arises from the fixed bodies, but they remain 
harmless for man during the work in the fire. Further, how- 
ever, this book will deal with the transient body, which is 
always together with the fixed one; this transient body is only 
found and recognized by means of the fire. For in the fire the 
separation of the fixed and the transient bodies takes place. 
Now because man separates the things, the things that happen to 
him while he does so are to be undestood as a result of this 
action. For the transient ones are not without poison and evil. 
Each good thing which should be attained must be separated 
from the evil. Now it is the usual thing that there is no love 
without suffering, for so strongly does the enemy maintain him- 
self once he has penetrated into the good. Whoever wants to 
have the good must also expect the evil. Now man seeks metal 
so much without considering the injury to his body, and strives 
so intensely for these things that he ventures among his enemies 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 81 


and sees that he is surrounded by them, but nevertheless he 
remains because of the good which lies together with the poison. 
For one who smelts see the fumes from the ore, that they are a 
poison, and he sees that they are arsenical fumes and he smells 
that there is no good in them. Yet despite all that, he forgets 
his health, how inimical the poison is to his body, and he doesn’t 
consider that his mouth and nose are open, and that the breath 
enters into them and with the breath these fumes. Only after a 
long time does he see and feel that the poison will be his death. 
However, despite that, God wants that the treasures and wonders 
which he has demonstrated in the metals be investigated 
and discovered, for which reason he has indicated the art of 
discovery. And he has also taught the necessity of separating 
the ores of silver and of gold. Now since these things have 
been arranged by God and since the diseases arise never- 
theless, then it follows that the physician has been created 
because of these things, so that he may prevent, forestall and 
investigate the diseases that arise according to God’s plan. 
For God is so good that he never forsakes us; only if we 
fathom his mercy do we find great virtues in physic, that these 
virtues overcome all poisons. Upon this godly mercy of the 
great immeasurable virtues of physic, this book is to be 
arranged and several tractates are to be written in which the 
nature of the disease together with the properties and nature 
of the transient body are contained, followed by the cure and 
the physic which rules in such diseases. 


The second chapter. 


This is the nature of the transient body; it has three bodies 
within itself, namely the sal, sulphur and mercury. The 
three are separated from each other in the fire. And although 
the fixed body is also present in these three, still the fixed is 
separated from the non-fixed. Now when the transient body pre- 
pares to separate due to the power of the fire, one part goes 
into the sal; that is the ash and the slag which arises there. 
I do not intend to write about this. 


us 


82 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Further, the body sulphuris and the body mercurii, these 
two are the topic of this book, for the body sulphuris is the 
fire, since nothing else burns but sulphur; the body mercurii 
is the smoke which arises from the fire; the diseases of the 
people who work with fire arise from these two bodies. Now 
it must first be considered what is the body which is thrown 
into the fire, since the species of the fire and of the smoke arise 
from it. For each metal has its own smoke and fire. The 
smoke of ore which has already been roasted is different, 
just as the smokes of copper ore and lead ore are different, etc., 
and although only sulphur burns and only mercurius smokes, yet 
there are indeed various species, just as there are various ashes 
and slags ; experience teaches one to recognize these things if one 
has witnessed them. For this reason it is first necessary to deal 
with the form of that which burns and smokes. Each fire has 
its air, which is innate in it and which arises from the sulphur. 
This air has its definite nature, like an air in which there is an 
impression. This impression arises from the sulphuric ore 
in the same manner as a lily gives off an odor which is innate 
in it. And just as this odor is a natural impression which 
does not separate from the body, thus there is also such an 
odor in the sulphur, which odor is called air. From this it 
follows that those who work with fire take in the air which 
arises from the fire and not the air of the world, in the same 
manner as when a fog is present, which is also a special air. 
Therefore know that the transient corpora make a peculiar air in 
the element fire, with which one can also maintain oneself, just 
as with the ordinary air which we receive. This is proven by the 
salamander, which does not maintain itself with the air by means 
of which man lives, but by the air which is peculiar to the fire. 
In the power of the element the salamander has its breath, and 
outside of the fire it has no life. Therefore understand 
also, that a peculiar air element is born from the sulphuric ore. 
And although this air is only in the fire and not outside of it, 
yet when the fire gives off warmth it also gives off the property 
of this air like the lily its odor. What can be said about the odor 
of the lily is also to be understood concerning the admixed 
element air. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 83 


The third chapter. 


Thus you should also understand concerning the body mer- 
curii, which does not remain in the sal, nor in the body sulphu- 
ris, but which flees the fire. Know further that if it wants to 
separate, it becomes a smoke; this occurs as a result of the separa- 
tion which takes place due to the fire. Now it is its character to 
be changed so by the fire, that it becomes unknown to many. For 
this reason, however, it is discussed here. This smoke attaches 
itself, from which it may be recognized that it does not dis- 
perse or vanish. Although the fire loses it, also the sulphur 
and the sal, yet it seeks the cold and deposits itself; during this 
process one discovers of what species it is, for every smoke is a 
mercurius. At the same time that it is now recognized and dis- 
covered that the smoke does not disappear, but remains, it is 
also recognized how poisonous it is. Thus the smelting smoke 
occurs in many forms. What arises from the ore is to be 
recognized as arsenic, as realgar, as operimentum and the 
like with many other species. Now if we consider that 
this smoke is a mercurius, and that this mercurius is arsenic, 
realgar and orpiment, and if we know what dangerous poisons 
the three are, how dangerous they are for our lives, then we 
can know and recognize that contact with them is unhealthy; 
therefore it is proper to consider that the smoke contains the 
same poisonous powers before it is deposited as well as after it is 
deposited. And we see obviously that the air and the smoke 
become one thing and change into an inseparable mixture. 
And since man must have the air, so he must also have this 
mercury. For it is impossible for man to separate the air, but 
he must breathe it in as it is mixed. 


The fourth chapter. 


Now the question must also be dealt with: since it is not 
possible for man to separate the air, then that which the fire 
drives into air remains in the air, for the air does not consume 
the smoke. Now since the mercurius remains, it is attracted 


84 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


by the upper stars from the earth up into their regions, in the 
same manner as the needles of compasses are attracted in an 
opposite manner by a southerly magnet. Therefore know now, 
that the stars have in themselves the fleeing mercurius, which 
has been driven away by the fire, and which they too cooked 
and prepared before it existed. This they prepare for the 
second time and change it in the constellation and impression; 
this union is a mother of the febrile diseases. But since it is 
not intended to explain them here, but only what concerns 
those who work with fire, I recommend for this the corres- 
ponding books dealing with the subject. Now further, since 
the smoke and the air furnish the breath, the evil must now be 
considered which arises from such an inhaled breath, which is 
naught but mercurius peccans. Therefore notice the dichotomy 
which occurs here. The right air carries out its right office 
without being hindered by the mercury. In the same manner 
water which has been adulterated and is drunk against thirst, 
accomplishes its office and quenches the thirst without the aid 
of the adulterated thing, and thus it is also to be understood 
concerning this air which separates from the evil that is in man, 
in his lungs. This separation effects several ultimate matters, 
i.e. the mercurius enters and the walls and the region of the 
lungs dry up in time, and after this drying up which it causes, 
it precipitates itself upon them. And since the lung together 
with its region is comparable to a venter equinus * with all its 
properties and powers, for this reason the mercurius must 
undergo a change, and change differently, due to the power of 
ventris equini, than it does in the smelting works. Thus com- 
pare it with a food which is excellent and delightful; as soon 
as it enters the stomach, however, it experiences a dreadful 
change, which is effected by the venter equinus stomachi. And 
when it passes further into the intestine it experiences another 
change, this is carried out by the venter equinus intestinorum. 
Notice therefore that such various digestions occur in the body, 
and one is also in the lungs. 


1A vessel for distillation. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 85 


The fifth chapter. 


Now it is proper to speak thus. When the mercurius enters 
the lungs, it chooses a wall to which it adheres, just as the 
case or the situation happens to be. Therefore concerning the 
attachment there is not much to explain as far as the place is 
concerned ; for in anatomy many sublimations are found and it 
is useful for each one to know them. When it enters the action 
of the venter equinus starts. Some mercurii are changed to oil or 
fat, some to a jelly-like matter, some to a tragantic solution,” 
some to a foenugrecian mucus, some to a leather-like glue, some 
to a horn glue, and there are many such kinds. Therefore it 
is necessary to know where such putrefactions arise, so that one 
can recognize into what ultimate matter the venter equinus 
pulmonis has converted them. For something, which enters a 
region and is not the food of this region, cannot be digested. 
For this reason putrefaction ventris equini follows, whether it 
be thin or thick or in whatever way it can happen. Therefore 
it is necessary to consider whether this putrefied solution is 
deposited in the tubes of the lungs or in the membranes, and 
how this solution comes there. And sometimes it occurs that 
such solutions due to their acrid putrefaction begin to pene- 
trate further, by means of which penetration such fluids pass 
through the pores towards the region of the kidneys. Due to 
this penetration this ultimate matter is found in the urine, 
sometimes oily, sometimes in tragantic solution, sometimes like 
a psillian * mucus, and they are often considered kidney diseases. 
It also happens that such matters are also found in the sweats. 
These things are all found according to the subtle putrefaction 
of the venter equinus in which there is a great artist. 


? Tragacanth or milk-vetch. 
® Flea-bane. 


86 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


THE SECOND TRACTATE 
OF THE SECOND BOOK ON THE METALLIC SMOKE 


The first chapter. 


It is furthermore proper to finish the things that have been 
started, inasmuch as we have already spoken of the transient 
body to which is due the separation into good and evil. The evil 
is so firm in the good and united with it that they cannot sepa- 
rate from each other. For the metallic smoke, as well as its fire, 
and also its slag, are alone the three transient bodies that have 
been mentioned, but they are half-fixed because of the fixed body 
with which they are united. Thus there is among the metals 
a half-fixed salt, a half-fixed sulphur, and a half-fixed mercurius. 
From these three it follows that their fixed character is with- 
drawn and taken from the metals, and by means of the three 
every metal is consumed. For these three are the death of 
metals, since that which is attached yields slag, that which glows 
is the sulphur and that which fumes is the mercurius. For this 
reason then that they are so closely related to fixation, they have 
a metallic consumption, i. e. a metallic fixation which does not 
proceed any further, since the three transient bodies con- 
sume the metal in the course of time by means of the fire. 
Also gold and silver do not act like other metals, for 
they do not leave any slag nor do they leave any rust, 
Therefore know the difference by this: although the eyes do 
not see the sal of gold and of silver, still the departure is 
noticed by means of the weight which is visible in copper and 
iron since it disappears coarsely, but which steals away subtly 
from gold and silver and at the very last causes it to be consumed 
because of the sulphuric body which consumes itself in the 
fire. For the flowers and the pretty colored flames (flammulae), 
that accompany the refining arise from the sulphur which 
is in the gold and the silver. These same flames are the con- 
sumption of the metal just as such fire colors also appear in the 
case of iron and other metals according to the species of their 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 87 


sulphurs. Thus it should also be understood concerning the 
body mercurii, that it disappears in the manner of smoke. For 
every thing which lies in the fire has a smoke corresponding 
to the metallic fixation. Therefore know that the metals emit 
such sulphuric and mercurial spiritus, while they are being 
wrought and used in the fire, but they are so subtle that nothing 
is noticed without special attention. 


The second chapter. 


Now since there is thus a fragility in the fixed metals which 
is not as transient as the first one, know then that those who 
work with the metals are capable of receiving the same. Notice 
further, that they have a more subtle, sharper passage than 
those first mentioned. For this reason it should be noticed 
further that they cannot be recognized like the smelting fumes, 
because of their subtility in the lungs. Because these spiritus 
are so closely related to the fixation, the result is that the venter 
equinus cannot do anything to them. For this reason their 
ultimate matter is such that they penetrate the lungs and these 
parts in the same manner as a tincture (color) which con- 
sumes itself in the same body, so that they become one thing, 
the body and the tincture, and the body assumes the property 
of the tincture. In the same manner as when copper assumes the 
color of zinc, for which reason it is then ruled by the property 
of the zinc, yet the copper remains copper for the zinc cannot 
consume it. However, when the lung is stained it cannot with- 
stand the tincture, but the tincture eats it and gnaws it away, 
just as an aqua fortis which is poured over a linen cloth 
destroys the latter, and thus it also happens to the others when 
they receive the tincture, especially the neighboring region 
of the lungs and the stomach. At the same time this metallic 
spiritus passes through the entire body and where it attaches 
itself it acts upon that place, as is indicated above. For this 
reason various diseases are met here that cannot be described 
otherwise than as has been said above; they are to be recognized 
by their devouring character and by the many strange signs, 


88 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


that cannot be described with certainty because of their vari- 
ability, for their species vary so much, that only great and long 
experience teaches and indicates them. However, every physician 
should know that the diseases of such people are all related to 
the metallic kind. For the tincture of these two, sulphuris and 
mercurii, is so bony and pointed, that it consumes all natural 
humors, qualities, complexions, and colors them all with its 
character. Therefore the physician must recognize the tincture 
and not the humors. For although it happens that all kinds 
of diseases accompany it, such as dropsy, jaundice, water in the 
joints, fever, etc., still they are all ruled by the metallic tinc- 
ture against their usual innate character. Therefore it is so 
necessary that the physician have more experience in these 
things than the ordinary course indicates. Metallic diseases are 
not humoral diseases. 


The third chapter. 


Now these spiritus cannot be separated by man, but because 
he is in the air, he is also in these spiritibus, therefore know 
further, that the air not only enters through the lung tube 
but also through the nose. Now the most subtile part of the 
air, which is inspired through the nose, is not precipitated in the 
pharynx, but rises into the brain and its regions. For you 
should know this, that the brain must have air as well as the 
lung; and just as it is understood and has been explained con- 
cerning the lung, thus you should also understand it concerning 
the brain, that in the brain too putrefactions, tartara, realgar, 
fuligo etc. grow and arise. Therefore the nose exists to furnish 
the tube through which the air goes into the brain; the most 
subtile and the coarsest inhalations precipitate themselves in the 
lungs, but when the nose is clogged and doesn’t allow any breath 
to pass through, they pass upward from the pharynx, through 
the internal nasal orifices. Therefore we can understand the 
headache, the head ulcer, the head sickness and other diseases 
of the head that arise in this way, such as paralysis, lethargia, 
tortura, etc. Now although these diseases exhibit and reveal 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 89 


themselves according to the old nature, they are still like venus 
album * or aurichalcum,° that is, if the tincture were not there, 
it would be the old disease; but the tincture, that cannot be 
separated from it without harm, gives the name here, so that 
such a paralysis is called paralysis mineralis. Thus likewise 
lethargia mineralis etc., and the same with the others. For just 
as various diseases of the old nature are found, thus various tinc- 
tures can also occur. Thus too it can not be contradicted that 
the same is likewise to be understood concerning the first smelt- 
ing fumes and also concerning the brain; because in these fumes 
there are also many subtile spiritus that can be mixed with 
the subtile air, which is determined only for the brain. Then 
come brancha, pituita, coryza, catarrhus and others. And thus 
as it has been explained concerning the brain and the lungs, 
you should also understand such an action in the stomach. 
And although various things could be contradicted, still the 
anatomy of the stomach reports it thus, visibly showing fuligo, 
tartarus, realgar, as well as bitumina, muscilagines, galredas 
and others. However, such a hidden descending air enters into 
the stomach, that one can hardly conceive of it or perceive it 
without proof. 


The fourth chapter. 


Now in order to explain the things further from one handi- 
craft to another, know then that every handicraft has its 
metallic spirit, thus, those who work with iron succumb to the 
spirit of iron and those who work in fire with copper succumb 
to the copper spirit. Thus too with the other metals. And those 
who work with brass succumb to the spirits of copper and zinc, 
just as those who work with albo ® and rubeo? to this metallic 
and colored spirit. Now know that these spirits are known, 
so that it is not necessary to speak any further about them here. 
But some experience with the handicrafts that work with metals 
is necessary. Thus those who refine by cupellation while 
refining silver receive lead fumes and silver fumes with 


“White copper. PaE TASS: ® Silver. 7 Gold. 


90 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


the properties contained in them; the silver refiners receive 
only silver fumes, those who make minium lead fumes, 
and those who make white lead and lead ashes the acrid 
lead fumes. For when a metal is about to break, it 
drives its strongest spirit from it. And those who pour 
antimony succumb to a hard sulphuric and mercurial smoke. 
Similarly those who pour zinc succumb to various subtile 
fumes: to those of Venus, Mars, Jove and to that of an imma- 
ture ore, which has already been roasted. And those who make 
ultramarine succumb to the most acrid silver spirit, which is 
mingled with an admixture; those who work with litharge 
succumb most seriously to thé lung sickness; those who work 
with cinnabar succumb to the spirit argenti vivi and sulphuris. 

Therefore understand further concerning the metallic handi- 
crafts how they poison and attack their masters and vulcanic 
slaves, and with what a variety of species and ways; the more 
the art is developed, the more enemies and accidents there are. 
Thus we see that when we do not use fire subtly, it does not 
poison us subtly, but if we seek very subtly in it, the fire opposes 
very subtile poisons. For example, the stellion crawls into its 
hole and harms no one; but if we wish to seek in it, we must 
expect much opposition, so much so that life and limb must be 
risked before obtaining from it that which makes one rich. This 
also happens to all those who divert and enjoy themselves with 
fire, so that finally everything turns to grief and sorrow. For 
these things are like the Epicureans who enjoy themselves with 
good food and drink; they must pay for it with serious diseases. 
And anyone who is happy with his pretty speeches will also be 
insulted by that. Thus no love remains without hurt. 


The fifth chapter. 


Therefore observe, as has been said, that we have three 
regions in the body in which these things divert themselves, 
the brain, the lungs and the stomach. Know then that they do 
not retain their evil in themselves, but send it further into the 
body, for which reason all the more diligence must be applied 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 91 


to understand the mineral diseases. For as you see, if the brain 
suffers from a mineral disease, the entire body also suffers. 
For the character of the spiritus is such that they gnaw in the 
same manner as a worm in a finger. Such is the mercurial 
character that wherever it centers itself, there it gnaws and tears 
like a burning coal. This tearing and gnawing is a cause of 
many diseases, such as mania, phrenesis etc. Thus it also occurs 
that an orexis * arises in the lungs which is like a panaritium, 
and in the stomach too it gnaws and tears continually around 
the pit of the stomach, as if a biting worm were there. And 
not only does it cause this gnawing and tearing, but also many 
more effects, whose species and names have never been recog- 
nized or mentioned, and which cannot be named here because of 
lack of room. But everyone should endeavor to be well instruc- 
ted concerning this disease according to the old nature, conse- 
quently one should gather experience in these mineral diseases 
and learn in those places where these diseases are and live; for 
the physician becomes learned through this exercise and experi- 
ence. For even if I would report and describe everything, still 
no one would be able to understand it without the experience. 
Thus if he wants to have the experience, let him acquire it 
where it is, that is among the mineral diseases. For who could 
be taught the knowledge of experience from paper, since paper 
has the property to produce lazy and sleepy people, who are 
haughty and learn to persuade themselves and to fly without 
wings, all of which things are repugnant to the physician. 
Therefore the most fundamental thing is to hasten to experience. 


® Cramp or gnawing pain. 


92 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


THE THIRD TRACTATE 
ON THE DISEASES OF THE SALT ORES, NATURAL AND 
ARTIFICIAL 


The first chapter. 


Since all the ore diseases of the mines are supposed to be 
included in this project, the salt ores ought also to be explained 
among them. Now they do not act deeply in the body, because 
vapors that dissolve in the warmth are the cause of their spirit. 
And even if they produce a moist air, as happens, and come 
to the three places mentioned, to the brain, lungs and stomach, 
together with the other air, they are harmless and more likely 
to advance health than to create diseases. For the causes of the 
salt species are of three kinds under which all other kinds are 
included and named, namely salt, vitriol and alum. 

In order that they be tested to show that they are rather 
healthy than unhealthy internally, note this. When salt itself 
passes through the nose, it produces sneezing; if not, it pene- 
trates to the brain and dissolves the phlegmata, the mucus and 
the apostemata, so that these cannot collect in masses, and 
dries the head internally, so that a good, healthy and dry head 
remains. If it then strikes the lungs, it dissolves the same things 
in them, the things which produce coughing, shortwindedness 
and fullness. Also if the lungs are about to ulcerate, it prevents 
it and is like a balsam at this place; it doesn’t allow anything 
to putrefy or to be deposited; whatever wants to coagulate and 
to become inspissated, this moist air dissolves it. Thus too 
when the salt in this air enters the stomach it cleans it of its 
moisture, although this is otherwise not the character of this salt 
when it is taken alone, but because it is mixed with the air, 
the highest essentia that are contained in the salt can act. For the 
most subtile essentia are those that become an air. Thus the salt 
is also useful to the stomach in digestion; it protects the latter 
from mucus and confused masses, and maintains a good appe- 
tite; besides that it is also beneficial for the eyes, ears and teeth. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 93 


Thus you should understand the same concerning vitriol, 
that when its spiritus enters the air by means of its dry fumes 
or through boiling, a moist air also arises from it. This air is 
the most subtile essentia vitrioli and has the same properties 
as salt in the brain, lungs and stomach. Besides this, however, 
there are secret arcana in it against many serious and major 
diseases, such as jaundice, overflow of bile, loss of appetite, 
and too much fat. Similarly it also penetrates from the stomach 
to the liver, sets in motion and expels the gravel and similar dis- 
eases which exist daily in this air, purges, cleans out upwards 
and downwards, also the lungs, prevents pleuresis, the falling 
sickness, spasms, and the cramp. 

Furthermore observe too concerning alum, that it also rises 
into the air and is received. Although its balsamic character 
is not as great, it still has the property of salt, and with 
it also that of healing whatever prepares to open, it also 
prevents the heated fluxes which produce devouring ulcers, 
so that they do not enter into the external channels. Know 
therefore concerning these three, what the nature of their airs is, 
and that they appear more commendable than harmful. 


The second chapter. 


Now know further concerning the three, that when they 
become air they are also not harmful externally, only through 
long use do they become too hot for the eyes, also for the ears. 
For such is their character that they cure many kinds of external 
diseases if their air is administered and used moderately and at 
the right time. Thus every scabies is cured by these three salts 
according to the order of the concordance, as the disease and 
the physic belong together. Thus the air of alum heals pruri- 
tus, the air of vitriol alopecia, the air of salt scabies. Moreover 
they also effect the healing of open injuries, internally and 
externally, like a wound-drink together with a good external 
salve, which is prescribed for an ulceration with its contrarium. 
Therefore there is not much to write concerning their poison; 
in the matter of temperature they are very close to the salt, 


94 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


which is suitable to all complexes, qualities and humors. Know 
therefore concerning the handicrafts that deal with the salt, 
that wet themselves with it, bathe with it, or use it externally 
in some other way, that it consumes all fluxes and other mois- 
tures of the body (unless some special cause exists there). 
Therefore the trades that use such materials, such as dyers, 
soapboilers and similar ones, are also the healthiest ones and 
do not easily become sick without some special cause. 

On the other hand, now that the beneficial effect of these 
three has been reported, it is also proper to write concerning 
the poison which can be perceived here, and in the following 
manner. Every ore, that is not purified, but is still impure, 
contains poison within itself. Thus vitriol in its ore produces 
a mangy, scabby and itching condition, and draws the estio- 
menic fluxes out of the body. The salt with its impurity pro- 
duces pointed scabs, also the trembling sickness and bad teeth, 
and alum, together with its earth, produces everything that 
alumen plumosum® does; but they do not cause anything 
harmful inwardly in the body. Thus too, the diseases that 
they produce externally are not full of great evil, nor are they 
essentially bad and evil as they show themselves externally. 
However, as soon as they arise they are as has been indicated 
above. Moreover know too that there are many species of salt, 
such as saltpeter and the like, also many kinds of alum. How- 
ever, they should all be understood in the same fashion, and 
nothing should be considered in them except their strength 
which is contained in a graduated manner in them, and accord- 
ing to this should they be administered. 


The third chapter. 


In order that the things which concern the salt may be 
explained sufficiently, it is also proper to speak of the sorters. 
For the pieces which they use are taken from the three salts 
mentioned above, instead of from the common salt, saltpeter. 
And although the saltpeter is not saltpeter but saltniter, which is 


® Talcum. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 95 


boiled and made from nitre, nevertheless it belongs to the 
mineral growths, and therefore it is correct to elucidate its 
species in the same manner as has been mentioned concerning 
the salts. Now it should be observed further, how aquae fortes, 
aquae gradationis, aquae regis and the like, as they may be called 
are made to a greater or lesser extent out of the three. What 
these can do to man may be described as follows: In the first 
place a compositum arises there, this compositum breaks the 
nature of its own united things so that there is nothing more to 
be said concerning each separate one, but only about the 
content of this composition. But since there are several kinds, 
such as aqua fortis, which is made from vitriol and saltpeter or 
from alum and saltpeter or with saltpeter and calcined alum, 
know then that the strength of the water must be considered, 
for the spiritus are its strength. They are that which changes 
the air. Thus the most subtile part of the spiritus comes 
into the air which we inspire. Concerning the same air, observe, 
therefore how it comes into us and how it acts in us. 
In the same manner as a vinum correctum which is poured 
together with the aquafort, it precipitates its spiritus like a 
red scarlet and separates the strength from the weakness. 
Therefore understand also that as soon as an aquafortic 
spiritus enters the internal regions of man, its spiritus are 
precipitated and weakened so that the power which they 
received during distillation is no longer found in them. Now 
since their power is weakened by the natural moisture, it is 
not necessary to know any more here, except the consumption of 
the precipitated spiritus. For they do not allow putrefaction, 
moreover they also expel themselves by means of their own 
expulsive property (virtus expulsiva). Now further, however, 
since these graduation parts are added as cinnobar, plumosum, 
verdigris etc., this is to be understood concerning them, that 
these same graduation pieces are not precipitated, but remain 
in their uselessness, the cinnobar like a sulphur, the plumosum 
like a fixed salt, the verdigris like a fixed vinegar. Now because 
they remain fixed, note then, that they do not come out of the 
body without harm. This, however, is their action, they pene- 


96 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


trate so intensely through the brain, the lungs and the stomach, 
that they lose their natural forces, so that they no longer have 
their old digestions and expulsions. Experience teaches the 
recognition of whatever arises further from them according 
to the particular condition and property. 


The fourth chapter. 


As has been reported above many things are also understood 
concerning the aquis regum. But since they are made with other 
additions than with egg shell, than with the white of egg and 
the like, they become weaker than the previous ones are, but 
they can still be recognized alongside of the graduated water. 
Thus it is also to be understood here, that in distillation various 
things must be considered besides the salts, from which one must 
protect ones self more than from the salts, such as correctio 
mellis, correctio tartari and the like. These do not allow them- 
selves to be removed from the spot where they have attached 
themselves. The diseases that they produce have special charac- 
ters, signs, and properties, which can be recognized through 
experience. 

Thus you should also understand the other distillations in 
the same way, because the ultimate matter shows itself there. 
For the virtues and properties which this exhibits are also 
true of all salts and distilled things. For it happens often 
that a thing is good but becomes a dangerous poison in the 
distillation, such as honey or salt; for the smoke of the salt 
produces changed, burned blood in those who smelt with it. 
Thus the salts, which they add to the ore and which melt so 
secretly also do this. 

Such things also happen to the glaziers and those like them, 
the goldsmiths, the minters, who seek and make such additions 
for the purpose of flexibility, fluidity, gradation, cement and 
the like, not only in general but also in other particulars. 
Thus also to the alchemists, who seek many things in such 
materials and assay as a whole, in part and the like. In all of 
which the things must be experienced with which they asso- 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 97 


ciate and according to which one must act. There are, how- 
ever, many alchemists who reach old age; from this it may be 
supposed, that the spiritus of the things probably bring them 
there. I, however, cannot believe it but ascribe it more to their 
abstinence, hunger, their mode of life, training and the dis- 
eases, which make an old person by themselves. If good 
spiritus are added, as is reported, then their health is all the 
greater. But those, who are not temperate in eating, also do 
not arrive there; for these things require a good regulation. 


The fifth chapter. 


It is further necessary to speak of such workers, as are 
occupied with sublimation; they cannot maintain themselves 
without harm, and yet hunger and work are the best consump- 
tion of these things. Know at the same time also that the 
sublimations have several good properties. Thus sublimated 
mercury has the property that its air purges; now for one who 
needs a purgative it is useful. Similarly the sublimation of 
arsenic yields a heated spiritus in its air; by means of such 
heat quartana is also cured, also some acute diseases, also some 
fluxes, namely those of podagra, of arthetica and other fluxes, 
which the wood guaiac can also cure. Thus in the air mer- 
curii there are also all the virtues mercurii; for this reason, 
those who carry on sublimation are not tormented by pustules. 
Thus there are also precipitations, reverberations, calcinations, 
roasting and burning and many forms of preparation, in all of 
which an air spirit arises which is then of the same nature 
and has the same properties as that from which it arises. Now 
how these and the laboratory worker fit together, that is a 
problem for the physicians, who live about them and experience 
this daily. 

Now understand therefore in this tractate, that the salts 
exist and are used in various ways, but that they are not as 
poisonous as the metals. Therefore a physician, who wants 
to have a knowledge of these things, should gather experience 
in this mineral school, concerning which nothing can be said 


8 


98 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


or written without a great and evident knowledge of the things. 
Even here nothing can be learned unless the pupils and those, 
who want to learn there, have worked in the mineral world and 
were raised there, without which it is not possible to discover these 
things. But as regards the knowledge of these things which is 
given to the blind (unexperienced), who can say that that which 
was painted is actually that which should have been painted; 
it always has defects, wants, and mistakes, which then create 
dislike. Man is made by man; thus nothing becomes perfect 
by reading or painting from something else, nothing tested, 
nothing confirmed, unless it arises from the foundation from 
which the river comes, where those drink who are thirsty for it. 


THE FOURTH TRACTATE 
ON THE CURE 


The first chapter. 


Now after the origin and the extraction of the mineral dis- 
eases have been explained in the first three tractates, so now 
it is not necessary to relate that the cure will be discussed 
in the fourth tractate. Thus there are two kinds of cure: one of 
the metallic minerals and the other of the salt. Know therefore 
that these differ from all others, and must have a special treat- 
ment. First, as far as the metallic fixed sulphur, sal, mer- 
curius are concerned and those that are not considered as fixed, 
they need but a single description of their cure. What, however, 
must be known concerning the salt, is almost physic itself. 
There is more to point out however, concerning the trades and 
artists that are infected with such fumes. However in all that, 
which was explained, it is proper to attack the physic in another 
way, so that the fixed and subtile spiritus in their arcana will 
be conquered. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 99 


The second chapter. 


In order to learn how to prepare the prescriptions for those 
diseases which have a mineral origin, know first, that 
of the air which was discussed in this book only the element 
fire shall be considered, since its elemental action is accomplished 
here at this spot. In the same manner as you may observe that a 
fire consumes like an element and not like a warmth, or that 
the sun dries not like a fire but like a warm thing. This warmth 
and fire are of two kinds, the one is an element, the other a 
quality. 

Now there is nothing to be said here about the quality, 
only the element is to be discussed here. In the same manner 
as a fire works in the wood, notice then thus these spiritus 
act in the member to which they have attached themselves. 
And that it does not burn as rapidly as the wood is due to 
the living power which has a growing moisture within itself, 
by means of which the fire is deprived of its violence, so long 
until the moisture stops growing. 


The third chapter. 


Now it follows from this that the physic should oppose this 
fire through the power of the element, just as water alone 
extinguishes fire and nothing else. For the actual elements 
must be overcome by effective elements. For the quality and 
the element are different, that is, warmth is one thing and fire is 
something else. Thus it is not necessary to pay attention here to 
the warmth, but rather to the fire; for this reason complexion 
cannot come to complexion, since fire is not overcome by the 
complexions, but the complexion overcomes its equals and the 
element its equals. Thus for example: Suppose there were a dis- 
ease which was warm in itself, now this warmth must have a 
moisture in itself or a dryness, which is innate as its diathesis, as 
De gradibus et complexionibus are understood. Now it follows 
from this that the physic too should be made by means of such a 
diathesis. Here, however, the things that concern the element 


100 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


are not to be considered. For in the element there is no diathesis, 
instead a united nature is master of the others, as the wetness of 
water is master of the fire and neither cold nor warmth. For this 
reason the water is wet and neither cold nor warm. The cold 
which is ascribed to it is an accidental coldness, which neither 
remains nor is helpful in the action of the wetness. In the same 
manner the cold is foreign to the water, as for instance when you 
cause it to boil over the fire. When the fire is no longer there, 
it returns to its temperature; thus too when the strange cold 
leaves it, it returns to the same middle temperature as after 
the boiling. 


The fourth chapter. 


Know then, that the disease is an element and not a quality 
and complexion. Now since the disease is an element, 
namely the fire, it is also necessary to differentiate the physic 
and to recognize it thus, that in it the element is wetness and 
not the complexion or qualitas humiditatis. For wetness and 
moisture are of two kinds and have these differences: what- 
ever is wet is not consumed, but what is moist, that can become 
dry ; what is dry can become moist, but it can do nothing against 
the element, and what is not consumable should be recognized 
as follows: whatever is subject to coagulation is moist, but that 
which is not subject to coagulation, is wet. In order for the 
things to be recognized I recommend them to one who is experi- 
enced in the transmutations and preparations of the art. Now 
because the fire and the wetness are in man, the wetness is not 
coagulated. However, as soon as the humida are administered 
against such a fire, they coagulate; now one dryness comes to 
the other and wood is added to the fire. But whatever is wet, 
even if it is distilled by the fire to a steam, yet it remains 
unbroken, for it redistills itself because man bears an alembic 
within himself. 


The fifth chapter. 


Now to speak further concerning the physic, know then that 
there is yet another power in it, the power of the elements which 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 101 


is overlooked in natural things. If it is a wetness, then the 
dropsy arises, which otherwise has no other origin; if the dry- 
ness is powerful, then ethica and its species follows. Then one 
can say: you have spoiled him by purging, that has happened 
because the element was disregarded, thus one can also say, you 
have overlooked the element fire and brought the patient to 
marasmus. Thus too if the element air is overlooked, you 
bring the sick one to colics and contractions. Thus too, 
if the element of the earth is overlooked, the patient falls into 
quartan exaltations (quartan fever). Now as the four dis- 
eases are elemental, not humoral, therefore it is also proper 
to write concerning their monarchy and to proceed according 
to it. Thus it is indicated, that the remedy should also be kept 
in this and should not be exceeded further, so that the afore- 
mentioned diseases should not follow. The sum is therefore that 
the mineral disease is a material fire which keeps its specific 
nature in its own world. For this reason the physic must also be 
a metallic wetness as is said above, and thus by means of the 
physic and through this process humidum radicale is preserved 
in its quantity. And, as long as it remains, no disease can be 
perceived; the prescriptions of this elemental wetness follow 
later. 


The sixth chapter. 


Therefore the remedies must be selected, which are free of 
coagulation. For example take alum, in this is wetness and 
coagulation. Now when they are separated from each other, 
the quality comes to one place and the same happens to the ele- 
ment. Now the element of alum is closest to the element water ; 
for the element water also stands in its vessel like alum after its 
boiling, and after having been separated from the coagulated 
substances and having entered into its own clear element, but it 
is then deprived of the curative arcana of which the alum is 
not deprived. For the water is only a physic against the micro- 
cosmic fire. Therefore, it is only because of this that the wateri- 
ness is taken from the alum, and is so rectified that it becomes 
similar to sugar, and it should be drunk in the quantity of 


102 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


1 scrupel. And if the signs of the element of diseases are 
perceived again, they are to be extinguished as before. Although 
there are more of such arcana, still for these I recommend the 
vulcanic school, since the things are to be learned there, which 
cannot be experienced here. 


The seventh chapter. 


Besides the arcana there are still some simplicia, which 
resemble the element water after the coagulation has been taken 
from them. Of these this chapter now treats, namely the water 
marrubii,*° the water barbae Jovis,* also betonicae ** and 
nenupharis.** Because, however, the art of such separation is 
not with the apothecaries, there follow instructions, how they are 
to be prepared, so that the workers who are set on fire by such 
spiritus may be maintained in health, the same too of those 
who are called alchemists, also the smelters and for those who 
have been mentioned in these tractates may it be salutary and 
helpful. And the instructions for cooking are thus, the herbs 
mentioned or their like are pounded while green and mixed 
with just as much cream of milk and boiled in a can for one 
hour in balneum maris, and then eaten in a sober condition. 
This food protects and conserves, defends and cures the 
alchemists, goldsmiths, minters, smelters and those, who were 
mentioned in this book. Pay attention to this that one half 
should be the component cream of the milk, or at least a fat 
milk, the other half the herbs as has been mentioned, or their 
like, as they are or the juice, although they can be cooked alone 
and then be cooked with the cream of milk as is indicated 
above; without this process the mineral diseases cannot be 
overcome. 


1° White hoarhound. 

11 Sempervivum. 

12 Pfaffenroehrlein (Betony). 
18 Water lily. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 103 


THE THIRD BOOK OF THE MINERS’ DISEASES 


in which alone the quicksilver diseases are comprehended. 
THE FIRST TRACTATE 


The first chapter. 


In order that the miners’ diseases can be comprehended in 
one work, there now follows the third book in which all the 
diseases that arise from quicksilver are gathered together 
according to their special properties as shown by experience. 
For the other previously mentioned diseases also required their 
own books for themselves. So know here at the beginning of 
this book that the disease of quicksilver has nothing in com- 
mon with the sulphuric, mercurial and saline natures, nor is it 
connected with other metals or ores. It is also not to be con- 
sidered here, that it is separated from mercurius, as if one 
wanted to say the evil which is separated from the good causes 
the diseases. For thus is the quicksilver within itself, it 
contains the good and the evil united, so that they are not 
to be separated from each other. From this it follows that 
whatever evil happens to you is to be ascribed to both the 
good and the evil, also whatever good happens is to be ascribed 
to both of them. To understand this take the example of theriac 
whose goodness without poison is of no use. Therefore mer- 
curius is a born theriac, which lacks nothing, except the prep- 
aration to change it into theriac. Following this, know 
then, that the mercurial poisoning when it occurs through the 
pure metal of mercurii is a hard and serious impression 
(effect). For the things which arise from a hard and sharp 
impression are stronger in their malignity than the others. 
At the same time every thing which achieves perfection is with- 
out poison and well tempered, but it is not true of that which 
does not achieve it, which stops at a time when perfection can- 
not yet arise. These things are of a different nature than the 
perfect ones, and they should be watched more in good and 


104 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


evil things, than those whose development has reached its end. 
Thus the mercurius is also a half-growth which has not arrived 
at its perfection, but as a half-growth it achieves the same power, 
which it should have if it were to grow into a state of perfection. 


The second chapter. 


Now that so much harm arises from mercurius is due only 
to the fact that it has not reached perfection, so understand it 
thus. The perfection of mercurius is coagulatio, and because 
coagulatio is not there, it is a half-growth. Whatever resembles 
it, is to be understood like mercurius. Every coagulated metal 
has in it the type of mercurius, but since it is coagulated, there- 
fore the same power is no longer present. For in the half-growth 
state and until the half-growth state is reached all metals are a 
mercurius. After this, however, follows the action to perfection, 
in which the separation of the metals takes place, each proceed- 
ing in the direction where it is directed. From this it follows 
that every metal can arise from the argentum vivum by means 
of the vulcanic fire, as it is found and seen in its origins. These 
things are pointed out so that you can recognize the mercurius, 
and can notice the difference between the coagulated and 
the uncoagulated. For all the things that are not coagulated 
and whose end and ultima materia should indeed be coagulatio, 
have all the species and kinds of poison and physic within them. 
Now there is none, whose end is coagulatio, which cannot be 
brought within this group, except mercurius; for many are the 
liquida (fluids), but their final nature is not coagulatio, but 
liquidum. Therefore the difference should be noticed here, in 
speaking of the nature of mercury, that it is not born perfectly 
but that it retains within it the property and the living and 
essential type, which the other metals contain within themselves 
in a dead state. For gold is only a mercurius. But because it is 
coagulated, it no longer has the same type. And although it is 
yet there, nevertheless it is dead. Thus too with silver, copper 
and iron which all have the mercurial type in themselves. In 
the same manner one can drown in water, but when it is 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 105 


frozen this cannot happen; as therefore the evil is taken from 
the water by congelation, thus coagulation also takes away the 
evil from the mercurius. 


The third chapter. 


What other cause can there be that this metal does not 
come to its perfection, except that the physician should seek 
his materia medica in this liquid, without considering the 
evil which arises from it, but only the great art which lies 
hidden in it, to discover this which expels both its own malady 
and other evils. Now because of the art the materia metallorum 
has been retained as a materia of nature, from which the six 
perfect metals are to be made and at the same time to find the 
essentia and the arcana, which lie hidden in the six metals; 
I wish to leave this and recommend it to the school to which 
it belongs. For here my intention is only to discover the evil 
which arises from it, and also its cure for the evil which has 
arisen from it. In order that its liquidum and its coagulatio be 
well understood, know then, that it is intended to be coagulated 
and is on the way to coagulation, but it remains a liquidum. 
From the same kind a vapor arises like moisture from water. 
Although the water itself is not seen to be a vapor, it is still 
an invisible water. And regard similarly water which boils 
until nothing more remains in the vessel; now that which 
has boiled away is not considered as water, but only as a vapor. 
This vapor settles in a distillatorium and produces water again, 
so that it is seen that the vapor is water. Now it is also thus 
with mercurius, which gives off a vapor through power of the 
upper firmament, like the water which is drained from it. Thus 
this vapor of mercurii enters into the air and with the latter 
into man. Now mercurius is in man like the vapor of water in 
the air, which is inspired. And as water again turns to water, 
thus mercurius again becomes mercurius, so that its distillation 
is seen and recognized, which is not only stimulated by the 
outer firmament but also by means of its own fire which it 
bears within itself, as every liquidum is consumed within itself 


106 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


through the power of its own consuming fire. Thus the mer- 
curius also drives itself to the distillation in the hills, clefts, 
veins in which it lies. Thus where it is lies hidden and closed, 
there it distills itself; in the hills its vapor cannot penetrate 
strongly through the earth. Therefore those who live in the 
earth of these regions must sit amidst such vapors like one 
who sits in a bath-house; it is as if he were to sit entirely 
in quicksilver. For the vapors make him wet who sits in the 
bath, just as if he sat in the water. 


The fourth chapter. 


Now there is not only in mercurio such a uselessness, which 
poisons man so seriously, but also in the stones; if they were 
not coagulated, who would remain on the earth without an 
evil? That is, without disease? For if their mercurius were 
to remain imperfect like that of the metals, these distillations 
would poison the earth to such an extent that nothing healthy 
would be able to grow out of it. However, the congelatio 
lapidum (congealing of the stones) removes all that. In the 
same manner you see that the rebis (human feces) is the most 
miserable and greatest stink in the warmth, so that no one can 
remain near it, until the cold coagulates and freezes it, by 
means of which coagulation all the disgusting things are 
removed. Thus it is also with the congelation of the stones, 
which does not permit this uselessness to rule. And if there were 
as much of the mercurius of the metals as of the stones, and if 
it were to lie on the surface of the earth, then the earth would 
not bear anything useful as a result of its distilled vapor, and 
it would poison the people on the earth like those in the earth. 
For the regions in the neighborhood of mercurius and in con- 
tact with the mercurial watch live in greater worry because 
of diseases than other regions. It is also unhealthier to 
live there where mercury is kept than where it is not kept. 
Understand also that the metals without fire do not show 
any poison; for the fire drives them into their fixed mercurium. 
And although their cold is unhealthy, it can still be compared 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 107 


to and understood like a frozen water. Thus too concerning the 
rocks. But other growths like wood, which are not so hard in 
their coagulation, are closer to its matter than metals and stones. 
Therefore the vapor which emanates from them is to be 
avoided so much because its liquida materia has not been led 
to the hardest coagulation. Thus too the herbs have even less 
coagulation, for which reason their vapor surpasses all others. 
Therefore they are also a goodly prima materia, which is not 
so repulsive to man as the metals. 


THE SECOND TRACTATE 


The first chapter. 


Now if the things are to be experienced according to the 
correct cause, as it is proper, then it can not happen without 
the astronomical physica. For the physician is subject to all the 
natural arts and wisdom which all gather together, and when 
they have all been brought together, he is first permitted to 
practise and prescribe against the disease. Now know then that 
the half-growth of the natural things has been dealt with in the 
first tractate, among which one is mercurius vivus, that can 
not be made solid but which remains fluid. At the same time 
it should be known that every natural thing which is open like 
argentum vivum, is like a house which is not closed and into 
which each one may enter; thus that too. Mercurius vivus is 
also open so that every physician can take out what is in it. But 
it is not so in gold, silver, lead etc. The door is closed by 
coagulation, and many obstacles must be overcome until with 
the aid of the art of opening up, of dissolving etc. its first 
matter is found again. Since the mercurius vivus is open it 
needs only to be directed to the vulcanic preparation The 
things now remain standing still and it must be shown further 
what mercurius is in its terrestrial constellation; that is, the 
earth has its heaven within itself and its astra are the mineralia. 
Thus mercurius is also an astrum; how and what, that is there- 
fore to be recognized. 


108 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


The second chapter. 


You see that the year is divided into 364 days and 
some extra minutes. The year consists of two halves, sum- 
mer and winter, and thus one year follows the other 
until the end of the world, and the summer follows the winter 
etc. until the aforementioned end: such is the creation of the 
world and thus is its order, and that is the world as man sees 
it. Now there is in the earth another world with other con- 
stellations, dwelling and the like, a special world which we 
leave here now. Now know that in this world it is not more 
than one year from the first day of creation to the destruction 
of the creation. From this it follows now, that after this 
year the things which are still in the earth at this time still 
grow (whatever grows on the earth does not belong in the 
earth) ; understand it thus. The seeds of the metals and the 
minerals have been sowed in the earth. They have their fall 
and their harvest in order to sprout sooner or later according 
to the arrangement of the godly order. In the same manner 
we know that now come the violets, then the thyme, then the 
roses, then cherries, pears, nuts, grapes etc. so long until the 
year has passed and it was a year. Although one comes later 
than the other, thus here too, now gold blooms in a region, 
now silver, here iron, there lead etc., that is past, that is 
present and the other future, that one’s spring is past, that 
one’s May, the other’s hay month etc. for those who were there 
at the beginning of the world, they have reached the gold 
and silver of the spring with the violets, their successors have 
taken the gold and silver with the clover and the crowfoot etc. 
and so further and further from the first to the last the time 
of the year is divided. Thus what falls off grows no more, it 
is finished; no other year comes into the earth any more. 
And just enough grows on the earth, corn, fruit, grass etc. 
Thus man is also provided with metals, yet the difference is 
that this metal is that of the violet, this is that of the globe 
flower, that of the cherry, that of the pears, that of the corn, 
that of the grapes, that is according to the period of the year, 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 109 


and according to the months, which will follow each other for 
many thousands of years. 


The third chapter. 


Now since there is only one year in the world of the earth, 
as is indicated above, the division is as follows; know then that 
this year must also have its summer and its winter. Now sum- 
mer on the earth has a severe warmth and winter is also severe 
and yet both are not palpable, but are a chaos. Here, however, 
in the world of the earth both are palpable, substantial, neither 
cold nor warm. They are cold and warm like the sun and like 
the moon, but closed. 

Therefore observe the first explanation of the outer summer 
and winter, which is thus. There is a group of stars in heaven 
which make summer, among which the sun is the supreme one, 
which indeed makes no summer by itself but together with the 
band which belongs to it. Thus winter is also a gathering of 
stars which have their exaltations after the summer stars. 
And thus summer is a group of stars and winter also a group 
of stars, both being arranged to follow each other. Now 
observe then that the summer of the earth is a mass of ore 
pieces, which have the type of summer in their nature. And 
thus there is also an ore, which has the nature of winter within 
itself ; and thus summer and winter are in the ore and not in 
the time nor in the day, or month or hour. Just as snow on a 
mountain and a ripe, blooming garden can exist next to each 
other, thus summer and winter also exist next to each other 
When they are opened and led into the creation, then the sum- 
mer in the summer nature finds itself like the outer summer 
and the winter is like the outer winter in its nature; the property 
and quality can be compared, from which comparison the 
philosophy of the astronomical physician takes its origin. 


The fourth chapter. 


Thus there is only one year in the earth, and the summer 
and the winter are separated from each other, hidden and 


110 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


kept in their bodies, but they are not hidden in the external 
world because there these things are so constituted that their 
nature leaves them. But those that remain enclosed in them 
do not give off any cold or warm rays, and the exuding power 
of cold and warmth remains enclosed, although other properties 
burst and leave. In the same manner a secret kind radiates 
from the moon which vexes man, although it does not rule the 
cold with its stars. Thus this winter of the earth is only a 
mercurius vivus, that is an argentum vivum, and it has all the 
properties of the moon and the entire nature of winter. In it 
lie all the winter stars, the types of winter and whatever 
belongs to it. Therefore it is proper to speak of and to discuss 
the nature of mercurius vivus so that you may recognize what 
force and power it possesses, which cannot be understood with- 
out the aforementioned explanation; and although the name 
is not commonly used at this place and has not been chosen 
according to nature, but it has been named mercurius, like 
aurum the sun. Thus it has not been arranged wisely nor in 
accord with a well-founded philosophy. For mercurius, in 
accordance with its nature would better have been named luna, 
hiems nox, frigus or glacies. Yet because it is not firm, but is 
an open metal, therefore its name remains. Still, here it should 
be understood as luna or hiems, which corresponds to many 
stars. And silver should be saturnine and lead in place of mer- 
curius, an order which the stars maintain and also the nature of 
things, as experience teaches their properties, nature and quali- 
ties, without which nothing can be treated nor discussed. 


The fifth chapter. 


Now that you have knowledge of mercurius, namely that it is 
a planet of the earth and luna, as the astronomy of the earth 
also proves, then know now that man is subject to the same 
planets. You know what power luna has over man and 
why the winter stars, which make the winter, bring man into 
their exaltations. Thus it is also to be understood concerning 
the nether planets of the earth, that they act in the same 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS py 


way on their climates and exhibit the influence of their power, 
but not over us men, for they are compact, coagulated, con- 
gealed, indurated. Therefore the actions which are in them 
cannot leave them, and so man remains safe from their action. 
But mercurius, which is called luna, is open, is not compact, 
nor indurated, therefore the lunatic effects can pass out of it as 
they do from luna, except the essential cold. Now since argen- 
tum vivum alone among all the stars, also on the earth, has an 
effect on man, know therefore that you should understand its 
nature and properties from the supreme luna, and what it is, 
that is mercurius vivus also; it is the luna of the earth, but 
with this difference: we bear the moon in the heavens only to a 
definite weight and in a definite degree, no more and no less, but 
only according to its course. The terrestrial luna possesses the 
same property, it can be absent, it can be present to a great or 
lesser degree or in excess. According to whether it is present, 
thus its effect may also be expected. Now this is the reason 
why we write about those who are hurt by the terrestrial moon, 
because they live, walk and deal with it. This cannot be com- 
pared with the upper moon; it is the cause of the lunatic dis- 
eases, concerning which I want to relate my experiences. For 
if it were possible for man to build a palpable moon, similar dis- 
eases would be found both in the upper moon and in mercurius. 


THE THIRD TRACTATE 


The first chapter. 


To finish this project it is necessary to know how repulsive 
argentum vivum is for man, who can hurt or spoil neither the 
moon nor argentum vivum; they always remain uninjured in 
their nature. But man is the cause that man is made of the 
limbus, and this limbus has all the elements and natures within 
itself. Now since the limbus is such and man arises from it, 
it is therefore his father. From which it follows that the sun 
must fear the father and that the father commands the sun. 
Thus it follows from this, that we drown, that we must be 


2 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


poisoned by the stars, by the elements etc. and that we must 
succumb to their nature For just as little as a child can say, 
my blood is not from my father and mother, so we too cannot 
say that we can live without the elements. And just as a 
child is born of a father and a mother and retains the nature 
with which it was born until death, thus in us too our father’s 
limbus must be recognized, which rules in us always, just as 
with a child in the mother’s body. For all of us, although we 
are grown up, still lie in the mother and the uterus sur- 
rounds us all and whatever lies in the uterus must be the same 
as that which the uterus is and bears. Thus all the elements 
and everything that has been. generated are around us. And 
we walk and wander among them. Therefore we are as loose 
and soft as a chick in its shell; for all the rays of the planets 
and of the limbus, which is the seed, enter into us and produce 
an essential action, for heaven and earth are the uterus and 
both are one thing. And man is the least thing and yet 
everything. 
The second chapter. 


At the same time, it should also be known, that two repulsive 
elements cannot meet each other without injury, just as the 
summer must yield to the winter and the winter to the summer. 
Now nature has created things so, that repulsive things do not 
meet. That is, repulsive things do not meet in the course of 
nature but only like with like. That is, green does not injure 
a cold herb nor a warm one, nor does the yellow, red etc. color, 
and the element remains without anything repulsive in its 
body. Yet it is said, however, that thunder, lightning, showers 
arise from repulsive things, but it is not true. For the noise, 
the light and the fire come through the power of the elements 
and from its own nature and not from repulsive things. 

For see that gunpowder is sulphur and saltpeter, they are 
both one element and yet a repulsiveness is present This 
repulsiveness is not in the element but in the fluid. For the 
fluid of sulphur and the fluid of saltpeter can not be together 
alone because of the fluid, and not because of the elements. Thus 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 113 


it is also with the origin of thunder. Just as a man and a 
woman both have a warm complexion, both are of one nature, 
property and quality, as far as blood, flesh and bones are con- 
cerned. But that they do not remain together, but flee from 
each other, is not the fault of nature and of the element, but of 
a nature, which is like a fluid, which differs in form and 
application. This application is the contrarium, which shall 
be discussed. Thus through such an application repulsive 
planets become violent and the like; this I leave to other books. 


The third chapter. 


Now observe as follows that two repulsive things cannot 
remain in their element without becoming disorganized. Man 
has a warm nature, and every human being is like unto another 
in warmth, both men and women. That one says, however, he 
is cold, the other is such etc., is false and without foundation. 
In the same way a woman also remains in the warmth of a 
man and does not become colder. From this it follows, since 
man is warm by nature and the terrestrial moon is cold, the 
two are repulsive to each other. But why should the cold of 
mercurii concern man? There is no reason for this, for they 
do not come together in one object nor are they forced together ; 
therefore they cannot break one another. Here, however, we 
are concerned with the harm which is to be explained and which 
is a tincture; the element itself is not present but it acts upon 
man through its tincture. Thus just as when one throws a 
poison into water, the two are not repulsive, for the water 
does not oppose the poison, for there is nothing in it which 
opposes the one or the other, but rather its warmth etc. Know 
therefore that argentum vivum has a poison within itself. With 
the poison it tints man, and the tincture, which it and other 
planets have in an invisible form, and which the dyer has in a 
visible form, is the tincture which produces sickness. Therefore 
it is not that one element breaks another in its element, but 
both remain in their elements, man warm, the tincture cold. 
And since the external tincture places the cold in man, there- 


9 


114 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


fore the disease is there, and health and the diseases can well 
remain together, nor do they separate, but both remain wholly 
and completely together. Therefore when the disease is removed, 
health alone is present. If it had not remained during the dis- 
ease, then the patient would not have recovered. Therefore 
they are well able to remain together, but whatever rules, that 
is effective. 


The fourth chapter. 


Now since mercurius vivus is a winter, thus it also acts 
like the winter. Winter does not drive the warmth out of 
man’s body, but it dulls it, something which it cannot stand. 
And when one freezes, the cause is not that the warmth has 
been expelled from him, for it still lies in his center whither 
it has fled in a compact form. He dies, however, because the 
warmth has ignited the heart too intensely, and the warmth 
leaves it and permits the cold to enter, so that the heart suffo- 
cates. For warmth and cold do not mix into one in a born 
element, as wine and water are mixed, but like oil and water 
they remain separated, and thus the cold also remains. Thus 
it is also with the luna of the earth; its cold is not evident 
but the signs are noticeable, therefore mercurius vivus pro- 
duces shivering, chattering of the teeth and the like; if it were 
not the terrestrial winter, it would not be able to do this. 
For every form of shivering is an influence of the effect of the 
winter stars. And although warmth and warmth also produce 
shivering, also cold and cold; still that does not belong to the 
mine and earth diseases, therefore the cause will remain reserved 
for another place. Here it is my intention to describe only the 
mineral diseases of the earth, which arise from their stars, 
still there is no need to go any further than to describe mer- 
curius, as it has happened; for it is the terrestrial luna, the 
terrestrial winter. And thus it has two effects on man, one as 
a moon, because man is made subject to it, the other as a winter, 
because of the same stars and a like nature. How all that is 
to be recognized need not be described here, because the origin 
of the diseases has been indicated and sufficiently explained. 
It is therefore my further intention to heal the same. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 115 


THE FOURTH TRACTATE 


The fist chapter. 


Since it is now proper to instruct regarding the cure, know 
then that the winter which is in mercurius produces one kind of 
disease, which is a shivering without any frost being felt, 
as it has been reported. This you should understand as follows. 
Each frost is a mortal disease which like freezing drives all the 
heat inwards and the latter consumes the heart, and wherever 
the heat disappears there the member freezes. Now it cannot 
retreat from the center and cannot flee further and therefore it 
consumes it. Such also happens to the shivering one due to mer- 
curius, the lungs, the liver, the stomach, the brain etc. all 
burn internally. Where they shake, there the heat has left them. 
Because of this retreat the heat in the center becomes 
too great. Now a fire arises there; this consumes and acts 
according to the species and nature of its element. Now there 
arises putrefaction of the liver, putrefaction of the stomach, 
putrefaction of the brain, putrefaction of the kidneys, putre- 
faction of the viscera and the like and many such diseases so 
that they cannot all be mentioned. Then too the marrow is 
consumed in the bones, the blood vessels, the bones, the blood, 
the flesh in the skin, the cartilages and whatever else is in man. 
At the same time other diseases also arise, which are peculiar 
to the species and properties of such members, such as the dis- 
eases which belong to the lungs : heavy breathing, short-winded- 
ness, coughing, ulcer, putrefaction, consumption etc., to the 
brain: mania, frenzy, headache, fluxes, toothache, paralysis, 
apoplexy, lethargy and the like, whatever is comprehended there, 
and thus it is with all the other members, which it is not neces- 
sary to relate here since it is sufficiently apparent to all physi- 
cians what diseases may be produced by and arise out of this 
cold. 


116 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


The second chapter. 


Now, however, enough has been said concerning the diseases 
which mercurius produces by its cold; those who make them- 
selves subject to it accept it externally like the odor of a rose. 
Now further concerning the diseases which it produces as a 
luna (moon) ; know concerning it that the luna is also a new, 
quarter and full moon and that it waxes and wanes. Now it is 
thus. It grows from the birth of Adam to half of a man’s 
face, i.e. of the world, and if the half of the world is present, 
then it is its full moon, the waning is then the other half. And 
whoever does not recognize this moon, he speaks in error con- 
cerning the age of the world or of the judgment day. However, 
what its full moon or quarter moon are like know from this. 
You know the nature of the new moon as it concerns man for 
the upper heaven teaches that; you know too how it waxes to 
a quarter, and then from a quarter to the full moon, then it 
passes from the full moon to the last quarter and from the last 
quarter until it vanishes. Now as you know from astronomi- 
cal experience, even if you did not have the ephemerides, but 
only the lunatic diseases, still you would know how the moon 
stood by the signs that you would recognize in the sick person; 
for the lunatic diseases are certainly ephemerides of the moon. 
Now, if without knowledge of the moon’s course, the moon’s 
course is found in the sick person as in a calendar, then note 
that the mercurial diseases are found in miners with the signs 
of rising or with the signs of setting; recognize thus whether 
mercurius is rising or setting. If God would decree the end 
of my archidoxes then you would have to learn about nature 
in a fundamentally different way and thoroughly; therefore 
open your eyes, if you want to proceed correctly. 


The third chapter. 


Now if the moon mercurius causes diseases through its moon 
action, then know the signs of some of them in this manner. 
It is said that the brain is the member of the moon in man, 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 7 


i.e. the brain is the luna of the microcosm and rules in him. 
Know that you should not seek this cause, for the moon acts 
on all the members; not on one alone but on all. Thus the brain 
is also like any other member of man. The fact, however, that 
the brain is attacked more in the average man, that alone pro- 
duces lunacy. Thus if the brain suffers, it is noticed and felt 
in the reason, this waxes and wanes like the moon. Since this 
is so easily understood and is comprehensible to the average 
man, therefore it is said that they are similar. Just as it is 
known concerning reason, thus it should also be known that 
such signs are to be found in all the members and not only in 
the brain. Now the lunatic diseases are frenzy, madness, cat- 
bite, mania, St. Vitus dance, the falling sickness and the like, 
both chronic and acute. Now the reported diseases, which are 
mortal or appear together with mortal diseases and attack 
the brain and the region of the head, are paralysis, gutta, 
arthetica, podagra and its species. If the liver is attacked, inter- 
mittent fevers, jaundice and similar diseases appear, and if the 
kidneys are attacked, diabetes and its species appears, and thus 
also with the other members. Now they are mentioned here 
so that you should know which diseases the moon rules, for 
mercurius also controls the same ones corresponding to its 
exaltations, whether it be dropsy, consumption, ethica, quartana 
etc. These things are understood with the aid of the external 
astronomy, which it is not necessary to describe here, since it 
has been sufficiently explained that the terrestrial moon would 
be considered here and not that of heaven, both in the cure 
and in the recognition of the disease. 


The fourth chapter. 


Now it has been said that mercurius can produce external 
diseases through the action of its vapor and through hidden 
rays; know too that it also acts in the same manner when it 
is taken as physic. It would therefore be good if the mercurial 
physicians who prescribe mercurial medicines in the form of 
salves, fumes, precipitate, corrosive water and the like, would 


118 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


be better instructed concerning the nature of mercurius and 
would reflect upon it <so that they would not succumb to any 
imposture>. For mercurius is an eternal luna, in which there 
is no death until the judgment day, be it that it enters into man 
or remains outside, at the same time it is also a permanent, 
constant and strong winter whose snow no sun can melt and 
whose ice cannot be thawed. Now since such can be recognized 
here, it would be well to attack it with greater understanding. 
It is also apparent that man cannot digest it, that he cannot 
consume it; for all metals are digested, but not this one; for 
neither man nor the ostrich is capable of digesting it. But, 
however that may be, mercurius remains alive and does not 
die, and if you place it in the body, the latter has this luna 
within itself and also its property. Now to this is added the fact 
that the external moon unites with its own kin and carries on its 
government besides the first one more joyfully and thus pro- 
duces here these double diseases, <for what the moon is capable 
of doing in ruling over all diseases>, that is also possible for 
mercurius. Serious diseases result when it is used in a wrong 
manner. If this luna mercurii is not mastered, then all the 
diseases in it are incurable; unless this moon is subdued, 
nothing helps. For the correct cause of the physica, to recog- 
nize and to do the things. ... 

. . may be recognized as an example of the miner’s diseases 
and of the things, which develop in them, i.e. in the mines, 
where such diseases are. 


The sixth chapter. 


Thus enough has been said concerning the preservativis 
and the conservativis; for whatever conserves also preserves, 
and whatever preserves also conserves. Now the cure must be 
discussed according to the division contained in the last 
chapter of the 6th tractate in the 3rd book. Mercurius 
vivus must be removed from the body before the curative physic 
can begin to act. If this is to happen mercurius must be alive, 
and as long as it does not become or is not alive, it cannot be 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 119 


removed from the body. Therefore it is most important 
to make it alive, and then to expel it from the body. Note that 
the process proceeds in this manner. Assume that you had a 
sick man who bore a certain quantity of mercurius within his 
body and indeed live mercurius, then he would exhibit the 
following signs : the teeth would be almost black, the limbs lame, 
and the disease would wander from one place to another, first of 
all in the limbs and joints. These are the signs of living mercur- 
ius and usually at the same time they are at a fixed place, as if a 
hard abscess lay hidden there. However, if mercurius is not 
alive then the disease corresponds to the moon, with hardening 
of the bones, the urine is discolored, and the breath stinks. 
Thus both mercurii are recognized and understood. 


The seventh chapter. 


Now it is proper to speak further concerning the evacuation 
of mercurius which is not alive, and how to make it alive 
and apt for evacuation. Note the following concerning evacua- 
tion. Every mercurius settles in the cavities of the joints. 
That which passes through the backbone and the hip region falls 
into the knee joints or ankle points through the corresponding 
ligaments. In the same ‘manner mercurius vivus passes down- 
wards when it is placed in a trench until it finds a cataract, 
where it remains. Thus the knees are cataracts, also the ankle 
joints, the hip joints and the joints of the backbone. And some- 
times it collects in the ligaments, sometimes at the bottom in 
the soles, as deeply as it can fall. Thus it also settles in the 
arms, in the cataracts of the shoulders, of the elbows and 
further into the wrists, sometimes it falls into the neck, some- 
times out of the hollow of the corner of the eye, sometimes 
through the nares, frequently through the pharynx into the 
stomach and passes out with the stool. All this can be recog- 
nized where the things are present by means of the signs and 
good experience. 


120 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


The eighth chapter. 


Now if you find a cataract where you observe that mercurius 
has gathered even though until then it was believed that 
it was not there, then do something and place this cor- 
rosive over the entire area of the cataract, as extensive as the 
area may be, and do not pay any attention to any joints that 
are there, do not worry or be timorous on that account but 
make the corrosive thick and strong enough. The description 
of this corrosive is as follows: 


Rec. realgaris albi ij half ounces 
alkali of lime and iron‘dross j half ounce 
oil of roses as much as is sufficient to spread it, 
as is indicated above. 


It is the nature of this corrosive that it heats powerfully, and 
through his heat in the limb the mercurius begins to run and 
flees to the cataract. Following this, know then that you should 
carry out this treatment as long as possible, for the longer 
the better, namely for fourteen days or three weeks until the 
scab falls off of its own accord and the mercurius runs out. 
Then heal it with a rubber plaster until it is filled with flesh; 
then treat the area with crocus martis until it is covered with 
skin. At the same time you should also know that you must 
avoid other corrosives, namely sublimato mercurio and the sub- 
stances which corrode quickly. 


The ninth chapter. 


The dead mercurius must be revived so that it can leave 
through this exit, notice therefore how it is revived. First 
prepare a strong water bath of herbs that are rich in mucus, 
of the buds of firs or juniper bushes and also of fresh fir cones 
that have been boiled; let the patient bathe in it as hot as he can 
after having considered his strength. The same can be done 
in the hot springs of Pfeffers, Baden, Plumbers, Gastein, Doe- 
plitz, Ach etc. or Embs, Goeppingen etc. or in artificial sulphur 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 121 


baths etc. And when they come out of the bath they should be 
massaged with succo flammulae* or with oleo de piperibus,? 
following this they should be made to sweat, in any way that it 
can be done, either with theriac or with mithridate and the 
treatment should be continued without taking any notice of 
the patient’s pains or days of sickness; for it becomes alive 
through such pains. When it then shows itself to be alive, 
which can be recognized with the aid of experience, then treat 
as is indicated above. And as it often occurs that the pains 
do not cease, then look to the center so that you can recognize 
it. For often the mercurius which has been prescribed in the 
physic, has been deadened to such a degree, because the ingredi- 
ents do not fit together, that it only revives very slowly, which 
the pox physicians consider a great art, but which I think is a 
great folly. 


The tenth chapter. 


It is necessary to write further about the diseases, especially 
after the aforementioned treatment has been carried out; so 
note first of all how the shaking limbs, hands, feet or bodies 
are to be treated. And this process is as follows, first 
prepare a bath of agimonia, of floribus lilii convallium, of 
radice hirundinariae * and of a few parts of egg shell. Let him 
bathe in this bath and after the bath anoint him with this 
ointment: Rec. boiled fox fat 1 lb., add to it 10 half ounces 
of distilled castoreum and 15 half ounces of distilled turpentine 
with pepper, cantharides and baccis lauri; Mix this mixture 
over a slow fire and anoint the patient with it; you will hardly 
learn anything better, not only against mercurial shivering, but 
also against gutta, paralysis, lethargia, and also whatever is 
possible to be preserved in apoplexia whose origin is recognized 
as mercurial, or in mercurial cramps, is healed by this salve. 
At the same time it should also be mentioned that you can 
improve the bath with flammulae and sabina according to your 


+ Crowfoot juice. 
? Pepper oil. 
* Lily of the valley, and swallow-wort (celandine). 


122 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


opinion, or that you can omit the bath altogether according to 
your judgment. 


The eleventh chapter. 


Note then, that the miners’ jaundice should also be treated 
as follows, after mercurius has been removed, namely with 
two kinds of physic, mineral and mundane in the form of one 
part asula* and one part rebisola;° administer a drachm of 
these two every morning until the sickness vanishes. But better 
than this is extract of rhubarb with liquor tartari, used as 
experience teaches. Miners’ dropsy must also be treated in the 
same way, also ascites and tympanites, also hernia, bubo, etc. 
together with the medicaments which are applied externally 
and which are very helpful in such natural diseases. At the 
same time, know also that this is a laxative for women, 
when they succumb to such mine diseases because of the uterus ; 
it also helps in the fevers and in their colics, contractures and 
other cramps; for whatever the liquor tartari does not discover, 
it will not be possible to find it. It should also be noted that by 
bathing the contracture of mercurius with serpentina and with 
lilio convallium, and by continually anointing it with axungia 
humana medullata or vulpina medullata or the same from a 
badger and by diligently keeping it warm, every mercurial 
contracture will be opened, only do not despair because of the 
long time. 


The twelfth chapter. 


Furthermore, several accidental diseases which rage in the 
chief members, also occur without any other accompanying 
diseases. As for instance an especially intense stomach-ache 
or stitches in the side, in the spleen or the liver, or strong head- 
aches, or kidney pains combined with intense pain in the back: 
these are not to be placed in the order of the prescriptions, 
but are to be treated with the great arcana, such as laudanum 
or the materiae perlatae and the like. For they are so hard 
and difficult to attack, that something can only be accomplished 


*Wolt’s milk. 
® Probably diminutive form of ribes = currant bush. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 123 


by means of the powerful quinta essentia, for there one must 
act in the same manner as when water is poured over a fire 
and extinguishes it by force. Whatever needs such great power, 
must also be fought with great arcana, as element against 
element, complex against complex, gustum against gustum and 
the like. 


The thirteenth chapter. 


Toothaches are also present sometimes together with many 
accompanying symptoms, with blackening, putrefaction, loosen- 
ing and loss of the teeth, and with strong stabbing pains; note 
the treatment as follows. There is nothing special to be said 
about the blackening since strong waters or tooth powder 
removes it; therefore I will not add anymore to it. The putre- 
faction, however, must be treated as follows: the teeth must 
be rinsed with honey water and then smeared with a mix- 
ture of honey and aloepaticum for several days, then they 
should be rinsed twice every day with distilled and prepared 
alum water, containing waybread salts, consolida, serpentina, 
etc. until the putrefaction of the teeth disappears. What can 
be better for loose teeth than to smear them with oleum de 
croco martis? For falling teeth there is nothing which removes 
the mercurial power better than oleum de nuce muscata. The 
stabbing pains, however, cannot be treated with poor mixtures, 
but with the arcana, as has been indicated concerning the chief 
members, and at the same time use bleeding and cupping as 
ordinary usage demands it. 


The fourteenth chapter. 


Now concerning the wounds caused by lightning, note that 
they alone are like a burn, and are not to be treated other- 
wise than with axungia porci (lard), which is melted very hot 
and poured into succum barbae and then made into a salve. 
For the same purpose, boil milk with crayfish and then apply 
it as a salve. And wherever wounds have to be healed or skin 
closed this should be done by means of the egg salve and the 
drying powder. Know further concerning the wind and the 


124 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


dragons which also occur in the mountains, that auricula muris 
should be added to all medicines because it has a special 
property to overcome and expel these things. 


FRAGMENTS AND SKETCHES FOR THE 3 BOOKS 
ON THE MINERS’ DISEASES 


The second chapter. 


Now just as magical fires and winds are seen outside, thus they also 
occur in the mines. Now their origin is as follows: if a spirit is like 
man in its acts and deeds, it can also act like the latter; that is, a 
spirit can go into the fields, chop wood and carry on all its business 
like a human being. With this difference, however, that it does not 
split natural wood, nor does it carry on natural handicrafts, that is 
not with natural things, yet it can do it with supernatural things, 
where wood and handicrafts are also present, but these handicrafts 
have their special cloth, wood, etc. They are spirits, there is nothing 
substantial in them, therefore their fields and cloth are also of this 
nature. However, since man is natural, he must also have his natural 
tools. Now man can make a fire from natural things, therefore the 
spirits can also make a spirit fire from supernatural things, which is 
like them. For man makes a corporeal fire and his things are corporeal. 
From this it follows that they can produce roses, horses, human beings, 
flowers, etc., but such as they themselves are, immaterial and not cor- 
poreal. For it is know as the spirit world with its incorporeal things and 
the world is called corporeal with its corporeal things. Thus dragons and 
other shapes shoot up which are not natural, and thus too winds and the 
like, which are also not natural. Now where such phantasy of the spirits 
breaks out, there many such things occur, which have been sufficiently 
attested in their book. At the same time know too that it often happens 
that witches and sorceresses cause such things, since the spirits 
obey them. It does not occur because of their actions, but they only 
believe that they do it, still these are all spiritual things about which 
I do not want to dispute here, but only to indicate sufficiently that 
these things should be differentiated from the natural ones in the 
practise of healing. Therefore know that although they do not employ 
anything natural, still they injure that which is natural, i.e. they 
deceive that which is natural and vex it both externally and internally. 


ON THE MINERS’ SICKNESS 125 


The third chapter. 


Besides that, however, know that thunder, lightning and sheet- 
lightning occur naturally in the hills; therefore a short meteoric 
explanation concerning it. Sheet-lightning from the clouds is a vapor 
of sulphur, which ignites itself just as a fire is lit by a flint, as is 
explained in the meteoric writings. Thus there is also a sulphur 
vapor in the mines, which arises from the terrestrial stars and which 
can be ignited by the air, for otherwise it is only a glimmering fire. 
Following this, note now that if a sulphur vapor lies in a mine, it is 
just as if sulphur fumes would be created in a sublimatorium, but since 
no fire can reach the fumes, they do not burn. Now if a light, a fire, 
or a crucible is carried in by the miners and the vapor reaches it, then 
it burns just as if a fire would come together with air in a sublima- 
torium. And because it is only vapor and nothing else, it is soon burnt 
out and is comparable in its nature to sheet-lightning. For all the 
things that burn thus are sulphur, whether it be on the earth in this 
firmament or in the earth in this firmament. Thus it can also be 
explained that such sulphur produces a sulphur stone, which when 
ignited burns into the stone, as long as such solid sulphur is there, 
whether it be earthy, stony, margazitic, like tale or like bismuth. For 
there where the ores are not boiled enough and have no stable com- 
position and fire ignites them, there the same thing happens to them 
as to a heap of coal, which is ignited by a coal and is completely 
burned. Therefore understand here too that such vapors are also 
present in the clefts, passages, galleries and caves of the mines, which 
burn when a light reaches them until the entire vapor is consumed and 
extinguished as is seen then. 


However, in order that you should know that mercurius is in the 
earth half the time, and half in the firmament, note then, that the earth 
is a special world, which has its special star within itself, and the ore 
is its star, and mercurius is an ore, therefore it is now a star of the 
time. That is, it is the winter, which the earth has. As you see the 
sun is the summer and is a star together with all the other summer 
stars, that is the part which is the summer ; know then that the stars that 
are the winter are also similar, videlicet galaxa; as long as they remain 
so long does winter stay and so long is it cold etc. Thus know then 
that summer is also in the earth, and they are stars like the sun and 
its stars, thus the winter too, like galaxa and its stars. These stars are 
divided into two kinds; mercurius is one kind, that is the winter, and 
the other kind is the sulphur in the mines. 

From this know now that the winter is half of the minera, the other 


126 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


half is the summer, half is the mercurius of which I speak here. 
For thus it is arranged that summer and winter lie near each other, 
but separated just as they follow each other on the earth; thus they 
are near each other there. All the winter stars (sidera hiemis) live 
in mercurius and all the summer stars in sulphur and remain thus 
near each other for ever and ever; this is the nature of the terrestrial 
star. Know further that winter lies in mercurio, and therefore causes 
shivering and freezing because of its nature, for there is the winter. 


III 


THE DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON, 
SUCH AS ST. VITUS’ DANCE, FALLING SICKNESS, 
MELANCHOLY, AND INSANITY, AND THEIR 
CORRECT TREATMENT 


BY 


THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 
CALLED PARACELSUS 


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, WITH AN INTRODUCTION 
BY 
GREGORY ZILBOORG 





INTRODUCTION 


Tue PLACE OF PARACELSUS IN THE History oF PSYCHIATRY 


This book of Paracelsus is perhaps more recondite and 
diffuse than any of his medical writings. It can more easily be 
understood if one bears in mind the historical and cultural 
atmosphere in which Paracelsus lived. It is seemly to recall in 
this connection an episode from the life of Rabelais, the cultural 
as well as chronological contemporary of Paracelsus. Rabelais 
was at one time a member of the ambassadorial retinue which 
visited Pope Paul III. Rabelais “ being bid to make demand 
[for some favor] only begged his holiness would be pleased 
to excommunicate him. 

“So strange a request having caused much surprise, he was 
ordered to say why he made it. Then addressing himself to that 
pope, who was doubtless a great man, and had nothing of the 
moroseness of many others: ‘May it please your holiness,’ 
said he, ‘I am a Frenchman, of a little town called Chinon, 
whose inhabitants are thought somewhat too subject to be 
thrown into a sort of unpleasant bonfires; and, indeed, a good 
number of honest men, and, amongst the rest, some of my 
relations, have been fairly burned there already. Now, would 
your holiness but excommunicate me, I should be sure never 
to burn. My reason is, that, passing through the Tarantese, 
where the cold was very great, in the way to this city, with my 
Lord Cardinal du Bellay, having reached a little hut, where 
an old woman lived, we prayed her to make a fire to warm us; 
but she burned all the straw of her bed to kindle a faggot, yet 
could not make it burn; so that at last after many imprecations, 
she cried, “‘ Without doubt, this faggot was excommunicated 
by the pope’s own mouth, since it will not burn.”’ In short, we 
were obliged to go on without warming ourselves. Now, if it 
pleased your holiness but to excommunicate me thus, I might 
go safely to my country.’ ”* 


+“ The Life of Rabelais” in Urquhart and Motteux’s translation of The 
Works of Rabelais. London, 1849, vol. I, p. 7. 


10 129 


130 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Thus the psychological motto of Rabelais was, “I do not 
wish to belong.” This was the motto of Paracelsus also. Both 
men belonged to a generation of which many individuals, cheer- 
ful or sad, angry or compliant, conservative or radical, would 
not comply with the dogma and tradition of the day, regard- 
less of whether the dogma was religious or scientific. Luther 
vituperated against the Pope hardly more violently than Para- 
celsus against Galen. To challenge, to abandon, and actively 
to combat Galenism was a difficult task at the time. It was 
difficult not because of the power of intrenched conservatism 
and the vested interest of the medical profession. It was 
psychologically difficult, because there was no theoretical or 
empirical body of knowledge with which to counter the weight 
of tradition. This is particularly true of mental diseases, which 
were at the time a department of theology and not of medicine. 
They belonged to demonology and not to psychiatry, and the 
best textbook of mental disease, the most popular and the most 
authoritative, was the Malleus Maleficarum, and not a treatise 
on clinical medicine. The Malleus was willing to recognize 
the authority of Galen only for the purpose of emphasizing its 
own preconceptions; the result was that very few natural dis- 
eases of the mind were recognized. Whatever seeds of sound 
psychopathology there were in Galen were thoroughly sterilized 
by the prevailing demonological doctrines. 

Paracelsus’ opposition to Galenism was threefold. First of 
all it was intellectual. The Galenic psychophysiology was 
definite and systematized. Paracelsus, striving to create a 
biological concept of man and to synthesize this concept with 
that of everything living in nature, was unable to feel at 
home with Galen to whom man was but another anatomico- 
physiological apparatus. Then, too, Paracelsus belonged to 
a humanistic age; this aspect of his-opposition to Galen was 
of a psychological nature. Paracelsus never lost sight of the 
patient as a human being; Galen was interested in the physi- 
ological aspects of the person, the so-called humors which as 
the ages went by became postulates rather than physiological 
phenomena. The succus melancholicus and the black choler 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 131 


were assumptions not to be questioned. Paracelsus as a true 
son of the sixteenth century would question anything which 
he was unable to relate directly to the man with whom he was 
dealing. There were, thirdly, sociological grounds on which 
Paracelsus felt the need of objecting to Galen. Paracelsus was 
a man of the people and of the earth, while Galenism was a 
kind of stamp of professional respectability, of being profes- 
sionally well born. If we recall that the decisive opposition to 
Galen which Paracelsus displayed while professor at Basel 
represented almost a revolutionary attitude, an attitude that 
well fitted his temperament, it will become clear that when 
Paracelsus approached the problem of mental diseases he threw 
overboard a tradition which was not entirely abandoned until 
the eighteenth century. It was only abandoned when, almost 
two hundred years after Paracelsus, Georg Stahl and later 
thase at the University of Montpellier (Boissier de Sauvages, 
Barthez) attempted to introduce the concepts of vitalism into 
the biological consideration of disease in general and mental 
disease in particular. The originality of Paracelsus thus stands 
out in even greater relief. 

There is another point to be remembered in this connection. 
The book on mental diseases, the English text of which is 
here submitted, was written when Paracelsus was about thirty 
years old, that is to say, in the early twenties of the sixteenth cen- 
tury. Weyer’s De Praestigus Daemonum did not appear until 
1563 in Latin and 1566 in the vernacular. In other words, Para- 
celsus anticipated the descriptive method in psychiatry by almost 
fifty years. He describes the clinical manifestations of epilepsy, 
mania, and hysteria, which he chooses to call chorea lasciva, 
in the manner of an earnest observer—a manner which does 
not appear in psychological medicine as a real methodological 
principle until the end of the eighteenth century and which was 
not established as such until early in the nineteenth by Pinel 
and, more particularly, his pupil Esquirol. It is indeed surpris- 
ing and rather puzzling to find so many details, so accurately 
related and so well arranged, in these clinical descriptions of 
Paracelsus. It is surprising because this was not at all the 


12 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


customary approach of the physician of the time. Even 
Agrippa, who was Paracelsus’ contemporary and who was 
particularly interested in the ‘‘ witches ”’ and the “ bewitched,” 
did not describe the various mental conditions with such clarity 
or detail. It is puzzling because there is a mystery as to when 
and how the thirty-year-old Paracelsus acquired his rich clini- 
cal experience in mental disease, for there is no doubt that with- 
out such experience it would have been impossible to render 
these descriptions. 

It is also impossible to overlook the fact that, apparently 
unfettered by any of the established principles of the medical 
law and order of his day, Paracelsus was not afraid to admit 
that he was observing a new aspect of a disease whenever he 
stumbled upon one. His whole approach to chorea is illustra- 
tive of his temerity and intellectual freedom. He takes the 
credit for this disease away from St. Vitus with the rebellious 
enthusiasm of Hippocrates depriving the gods of their role 
in the formation of epilepsy. Moreover, historically he was the 
first to differentiate the sexual components and the unconscious 
factors in the development of hysteria. This he does, not by 
way of inference or philosophic speculation, but by direct obser- 
vational assertion; he consequently suggests that the name of 
chorea lasciva be adopted and that the unconscious (unwiis- 
sende) suggestibility of children be considered. He refuses to 
follow the traditional assumption that children do not possess 
an imagination, and once he sees the manifestations of the 
latter in youngsters suffering from chorea he recognizes and 
asserts them with his characteristic lack of equivocation. 

The theories of Paracelsus concerning mental diseases and 
their modes of treatment, interesting as they are, can be no 
more than mentioned here. A special study of these will be well 
repaid, but this is to be left to some future time when the 
English text will have been before the reader for a longer 
period. To understand these theories it is necessary to weed 
out the Paracelsian pharmaceutical divagations, which were 
more a reflection of the time than a product of strict originality. 
Too, the limitations of the language will have to be taken into 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 35 


consideration. Paracelsus lectured and wrote in the vernacular, 
leaving Latin to those of his pompous colleagues who were 
clad in silk and velvet and who were not brought up on cheese 
and similar coarse foods. The vernacular of the time possessed 
neither the terminology nor the flexibility requisite to the swift 
and volatile thought of Paracelsus ; his conceptual thinking, both 
in depth and shading, was considerably ahead of his language. 
He speaks for instance of “natural” disease quite obviously 
meaning organic and physiological; when he speaks of 
“spiritual” diseases he quite obviously means psychological 
ones. There is no doubt that when Paracelsus emphasizes time 
and again that a disease may be caused by a disturbance origi- 
nating in the spiritus vitae and that the spiritus vitae may pro- 
duce physical symptoms, he is presenting, in a redundant and 
perhaps confusing way, the definite conception of psychological 
illness and of conversion symptoms. Even his discussion of 
suffocatio intellectus, in which he attempts to explain that reason 
might appear profoundly affected but that actually this dis- 
turbance might be but a result secondary to emotional or other 
psychological disturbance, is as keen a clinical observation as 
it is modern. 

Apparently Paracelsus was not unaware of the fact that 
mental disease is a highly individual phenomenon and that in 
order to understand a given mental disease a high degree of 
individualization of one’s point of view is needed. Therefore 
he constantly insists on the determination of the patient’s 
“complexion ” and on the variability of clinical manifestations 
of the same disease. In this effort to formulate a definite 
psychological attitude on the part of the physician more than 
in any other, the difficulties inherent in the cultural age of 
Paracelsus are evident. What was apparently in the mind of 
Paracelsus, what he intuitively perceived and conceived, was 
the concept of personality which was not formulated until the 
middle of the nineteenth century, particularly by the German 
psychiatrists of the romantic school. In the days of Paracelsus 
the personality was culturally born, but it was not yet subject 
to scientific analysis—it was lived instead. Paracelsus was one 


134 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


of those who lived his personality. He suffered from the same 
difficulty as his great contemporaries like Rabelais, Agrippa, 
Vives: they all became men of action or melancholy contempla- 
tion; they wrote a great deal with more temper than judgment. 
They were ahead of their time—a time which was not yet ripe 
to recognize the value of the individual and therefore still less 
to formulate the concept of personality. Paracelsus must have 
felt considerably ill at ease and bitter, for what he felt he 
knew was true; but he could not say it fully, and with a unique 
bitterness and rancor he resented the recalcitrant and unfeeling 
attitude of the medical profession toward the problems which 
engaged so much of his ardor. Consequently he felt shocked 
by contemporary medicine and with characteristic venom he 
repeatedly called it a whore for its venality, subservience to the 
powers that be, and complacent, uncritical hugging of traditions 
which had outlived their cultural and clinical usefulness. 

The text submitted here is an English rendition of the Basel 
edition of 1567. This was the first edition of the book. Huser’s 
first text appeared in 1576. Sudhoff preferred to use as a 
basis the later Huser text combined with the two mentioned 
above. From the standpoint of the general ideological principles 
and the fundamental clinical attitude there is no difference 
among any of these texts. The edition of 1567 was therefore 
chosen because it was the first to appear. It was deemed of 
some interest to render the prefatory dedication of Adam of 
Bodenstein who was responsible for the first publication of the 
book. Bodenstein’s postscript, however, dated February 1567, 
was omitted here because it adds nothing new to the atmos- 
phere in connection with the issuance of the book nor does it 
elucidate any of the views of Paracelsus evolved therein. 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 135 


fH DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS 
REASON: SUCH ASroits VITUS’ DANCE, 
FALLING SICKNESS, MELANCHOLY, 
AND INSANITY, AND THEIR 
CORRECT TREATMENT 


BY 
Tue Most HicHty EXPERIENCED AND ILLUSTRIOUS 
PHYSICIAN 


THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS 


With a description of interesting and useful procedures, appli- 
cations, and effects of vitriol and metals, compiled from 
books of the above-mentioned author, and faithfully 
published by Adam of Bodenstein. 


Contents and findings of this book are duly outlined 
in the preface. 


In the year 1567. 


136 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


To the Reverend, Noble and Honorable Sir, 


Puitips GeorG SCHENCKE ZU SCHWEINSBURGK, 
Dean of the chapter of Fulda and Abbot of the 
monasteries of Holtzkirch, Neuberg, Dulba, and 


Saint Michael, etc., my magnanimous sponsor and 
dearly beloved brother-in-law. 


If a person wants to have a book published, it is an accepted, 
long-established custom for him to find a noble patron for the 
safety and protection of himself as well as of his writings. 
How much more necessary it is for very important publications 
to choose honest patrons who, in contemplation of nature and 
with human understanding, can and do always further the 
truth! As far as this book and its contents are concerned, 
however, I am not in need of a patron, since the book is not 
mine but from the pen of Theophrastus Paracelsus, upon whom 
the grace of God bestowed the knowledge of truth and medi- 
cine to conquer the evil in some persons, whether it be of the 
devil or his adherents. Truth, even though it be hit by envy, 
persecution, and hatred, is always desirable, and this has been 
proved by thorough works. But woe to those who consciously 
suppress the truth. As the first doctor to graduate from a 
university and take up the wholesome and honest doctrines of 
Theophrastus and publicly defend them, I have studied them 
and, by the grace of God, absorbed them and imparted them 
to those who need them, to all those who are in need of good 
will, favor, friendship, and kind assistance. 

Therefore I am dedicating this very short book to Your 
Eminence; its contents clear and true are far more valuable 
than the writings of all those who had ever written on medi- 
cine before the kind and merciful Lord brought Theophrastus 
into this world. I dedicate it to Your Eminence that as a spon- 
sor of the just Christian arts you may protect me and defend 
me as much as possible against the hypocritic and evil tongues, 
that the concern which I feel for your welfare and that of all 
Christians may be revealed and disclosed, and that all may 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 137 


know my reasons for abandoning the Galenic school. There 
has been much talk to the effect that I have been instructed in 
Galen’s school and acquired not a small portion of my earthly 
belongings through it, and that I am a renegade and am un- 
grateful to my teachers. First of all, 1 must give an honest 
explanation of my actions, so that the truth may come to light 
now, during the lifetime of those whom I am going to mention. 

At Basel in 1556 I was suffering from tertian fever (exquis- 
ita tertiana) and I called in two most learned and honest men, 
Dr. Oswald Beer and Dr. Johann Huber, who at that time were 
most famous physicians. However, following this tertian 
fever, I soon developed daily fever, and then quartan, and 
finally tympanitis. I was tormented by those diseases and by 
all kinds of medication vainly administered to me for a period 
of fifty-four weeks. When I found no relief through the 
doctors—who like true Christians had certainly given me their 
best advice and meant well—nor through my own knowledge 
or that of pagan writers, a dear friend, Cyriacus Legher, a 
physician—may the Lord bless him—brought me a prescrip- 
tion which had the following ingredients: Spiritus vitrioli, 
Liquor serapim, Laudani, etc. Legher insisted that this 
compound in solution was a remedy of proved worth against 
all kinds of dropsy. In my distress I accepted it despite the 
fact that I was taught to consider Paracelsus, the author of 
the prescription, an imposter, and I should have hesitated. As 
I was at the height of distress and pain I took the medicine as 
a last resort, using it as much as possible. By the grace of God 
I recovered from all pain and illness in thirty-four days. 

At that time I was the personal physician of His Most Serene 
Highness, Prince Otto Heinrich, Count Palatine of the Rhine, 
Prince-Elect, and from my first association with him His 
Highness had admonished me to read the writings of Theo- 
phrastus. His Highness’ gracious advice and the effects of 
Paracelsus’ prescription induced me to consider the matter and 
to read his writings, and thus I became the clandestine disciple 
of Theophrastus, applying as much as I could the arcana and 
the medicines which he had advised. I was very successful 


138 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


with my patients, so that quite a number of envious persons 
said that I must be conjuring the devil since good effects were 
produced so quickly. As soon as I realized that I was on the 
right road, I purposefully and deliberately abandoned the old 
so-called “ medicine” and turned to the natural medicine as 
the only one where comfort and help for all needs might be 
found; and I would like to see one Paracelsian remedy in all 
his books published through me which would not bring true 
results. I can say in praise that his remedies are based on truth. 
As fruits compliment the tree from which they grow and as 
righteous works praise their master, art has certainty in truth. 
(I am not speaking of those fatal diseases which bear death 
in themselves and which no physician can help.) Can any honest 
man begrudge me because I have been supporting the truth? 
In telling how I adopted Theophrastus’ teachings I must 
disclose two of the objections of those who want to censure 
me. These ungrateful men say that the writings of Paracelsus 
are a fraud and that although we, his disciples, are curing 
our patients of their diseases the cures are not permanent, etc. 
Such childish statements come not only from simple-minded 
persons but also from those who are considered wise but who 
reveal their lack of wisdom by such talk. It seems proof enough 
to me that I have cured palsies, lameness, the French disease, 
dropsies, epilepsies, gout, stones, and frenzies. Should I have 
promised them that their diseases would never return? Would 
such a promise be human or possible as long as they do not 
abstain from food and drink and from the elements, which 
contain all illnesses and their remedies? Has there ever been 
a physician who was able to protect man against wounds? Has 
there ever been a physician who could have made a person proof 
against fever, blows, falls, sadness, joy, anger, open wounds, 
internal or external injuries, and all the other things which 
may befall men, although that physician may often have cured 
a person of such ills? This criticism is no criticism at all. 
How can we effect permanent cures of severe illnesses? Far 
be it from us to indulge in such presumption and unchristian 
blasphemy, when all our help and prosperity come from Heaven. 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 139 


If the Paracelsian medicines properly prepared are given in 
the right proportion every year, then they act not only through 
belief and confidence in the doctor but by their own proven 
effect. 

There is a second criticism raised by foolish and contrary 
people against us—that we pretend to utilize metallic sulphur 
(salt of mercury), and that this is ridiculous. These critics 
maintain that a gold or silversmith could insure himself of a 
business through our writings, for the knowledge of how to 
gain oil from metals would be revealed to him. Another critic 
has said that he is fortunate in being a good linguist and yet 
he has never read of such formulae in either Greek, Hebrew, 
or Latin. Since he finds nothing of the kind described in other 
books, he draws the conclusion that all our teaching is useless 
and false. By their ignorance and lies about harmful results 
such erring men hope to incite people against us. To tell the 
truth, this is another reason why I need a good patron, which 
I am certain to have in the person of Your Eminence, for I 
have offered to prepare under your very eyes substantial 
amounts of quicksilver oil, and salt from such metals as copper, 
silver, and gold, and to do other things which are useful for 
the human body but impossible for the so-called physician to 
perform. Indeed, affectionate, dear sponsor, there are many 
such arguments and it is unpleasant to hear them all. More- 
over, it seems fitting to let these petty quarrels rest and to 
speak about this litte book, its purpose and contents. 

First, Paracelsus philosophizes on the origin and severity of 
the diseases depriving man of his reason; he mentions the 
sickness of the epileptic, all kinds of gout, insanity, St. Vitus’ 
dance, loss of reason, melancholy and others. After this he 
gives excellent remedies, so that man can have no reason to 
complain that God has provided no help for terrible diseases. 
Although many diseases can be soothed by vitriol, it has seemed 
advisable to me to write on the method of bringing the arcana 
out of such minerals. I have extracted and dispensed them 
more than once and can give complete instructions on how to 
prepare and apply them. I have dealt particularly with sulphur, 


140 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


as it is the greatest preservative I know. Until the present 
time I have written little on either of these. Much has been 
written in the book De Vita Longa, Opere Chyrugico, etc. on 
the subject of metallic mercury. 

I am well aware that many will reproach me, saying that I 
should not so obviously throw pearls before swine, and that 
the time is not ripe for such disclosures. To these people I 
should like to point out that neither I nor any one of them has 
a right to possess such a treasure, let alone to bury it, that such 
knowledge should be turned to the advantage of ordinary 
Christians and invalids to give them comfort, and all for the 
praise and glory of The Almighty. Although true procedures 
are being described here in a calm and clear way, the Lord 
gives His gift only to those whom He chooses. The swine are 
likely to perish before they bring their works to completion, 
and birds who leave the nest too early soon regret it. Thus, 
he who endeavors to seek the glory of the Lord and the wel- 
fare of his neighbor and not his own, deeming it righteous to 
give and distribute with joy and a free hand, will certainly 
find entertainment, pleasure, and earthly nourishment. For 
who would have to suffer privation and beg for bread, if he 
put his faith in love of God and of his neighbors? How could 
a man not find earthly nourishment if, with the sweat of his 
brow, he searched for the gifts of the Lord and, having found 
them, applied them for the betterment of poor invalids? 

Therefore, I wish to warn those who are cooking a slovenly 
mess from Paracelsus’ marvelous prescriptions for concentrated 
diasulphur or diastybin; I also advise those who dare con- 
found his and Galen’s writings, which have less in common 
than oil and water, to desist. Those who by robbery and theft 
pretend that the salutary doctrines of Paracelsus are their 
own are not worthy of being admonished, and I leave them 
without warning. Almighty God will certainly put them to 
shame and teach them to apply aquas phlegetonticas and other 
malign corrosive “ remedies ”’ such as “ Celestes ” and balsams, 
and with all their stoechomantic, frivolous arts send them to 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 141 


Hechelberg through Charon. They should keep in mind that 
the Lord did not create the physician to be a thief or a murderer. 
I have said all this in an effort to leave transmutations aside, 
and I hope that in doing so I have not incited envy, anger, or 
animosity against me on the part of intelligent persons. I hope 
that I shall win praise and gratitude, since those secrets are 
such evidence of the miraculous alchemical and medical works 
of God that one can never be grateful enough for the diligence, 
labor, experience, and love which Theophrastus had for his 
brethren, and for The Almighty who bestowed such grace on 
him and enlightened his eyes. Even if I undertook to write 
large volumes on such highly important scientific matters, I 
would be unable to point out their powers and advantages 
sufficiently. I have discovered myself that the medications, 
if prepared and separated from impurities and administered 
correctly, give such immediate, positive results that they are 
regarded as miraculous. I have received numerous messages 
from most learned and pious men who are physicians appointed 
to the Court and to the principalities of His Imperial Roman 
Majesty, our Most Gracious Sovereign, and also to the princes 
and towns of the Holy Roman Empire, that I may expect to 
receive acknowledgment and not slander from other doctors. 


Now I commit myself to Your Eminence and both of us to 
Everlasting Almighty God and His mercy. 


Dated, Basel, 1567, the day of Adam and Eve. 


ADAM VON BODENSTEIN, 
Doctor of Philosophy and Medicine. 


142 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


PREFACE BY PARACELSUS 


In nature there are not only diseases which afflict our body 
and our health, but many others which deprive us of sound 
reason, and these are the most serious. While speaking about 
the natural diseases and observing to what extent and how 
seriously they afflict various parts of our body, we must not 
forget to explain the origin of the diseases which deprive man 
of reason, as we know from experience that they develop out 
of man’s disposition. The present-day clergy of Europe attri- 
bute such diseases to ghostly beings and threefold spirits; we 
are not inclined to believe them. For nature proves that such 
statements by earthly gods are quite incorrect and, as we shall 
explain in these chapters, that nature is the sole origin of dis- 
eases. In describing these diseases we find five kinds of loss 
of human reason, and as the first of them we shall speak of 
epilepsy, etc. 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 143 


THE WRITINGS OF THEOPHRASTUS PARACELSUS 
ON DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN 
OF HEALTH AND REASON 


CHAPTER ONE 


On the Falling Sickness 


There are five kinds of epilepsy that deprive man of his 
reason. Each of them may cause falling sickness. One is in 
the brain, the second in the liver, the third in the heart, the 
fourth in the intestines, and the fifth in the limbs. The first 
three are more likely to prove fatal than the last two. The first 
affect the noblest parts of the body and so often lead to the 
death of the person who has been afflicted. 

Falling sickness does not affect one sex only, but both. No 
one is too healthy or too ill, too young or too old for it. It does 
not, however, impair the health of the body, nor does it crush 
the natural being, for that is not where the root lies, as will be 
explained later. 

This disease causes great weakness and death because its 
severity leaves traces behind, by which death is caused without 
impairing the structure of the person. As has been mentioned 
above, there are five kinds of epileptic disease. These five kinds 
of epilepsy have the same cause and the same symptoms, but 
they do not come from the same substance. They cause the same 
kind of swoon, although the substance and the paroxysm are 
different : in some cases the paroxysm is accompanied by much 
foam, in some by much water; in other cases the patients roll 
their eyes; some have twists and contortions; some are stiff; 
some scream; some are quiet; some are thrown against the 
ground as if by force; some sit down gently. We must pay 
close attention to these symptoms, for there is a great difference 
between those patients who feel the attack before the fall and 
then faint, and those who do not feel it before the fall and the 


144 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


fainting-spell. Cause and origin are not to be found in the 
agitation but in the organ affected by the agitation and by the 
attack; the brain is affected in the same way as the intestines, 
but in the first case the illness is more dangerous, since intellect 
and memory are located in the region of the brain. 

Now we shall speak of the substance in which the disease is 
rooted. The disease exists not only in man but in all living 
creatures; the latter fall down in paroxysms in the same way 
as man. Some species of animals suffer from the disease by 
heredity and, being thus pervaded with it, none of their kind 
is without it, as can be seen in the squirrel and the lion, which 
become ill without cause. There are also many kinds of birds 
that suffer from it. Plants, too, which do not have any sensa- 
tions, show this disease—not by falling down, for they have 
no sensitive life, but by having paroxysms just as sensitive 
beings do. Trees become split and torn, as we have mentioned 
in De Infirmitatibus Arborum et Crescentium; they may even 
dry up for some time, and then, after the paroxysm, either 
recover and grow again, or die. In everything that lives this 
disease is possible; the paroxysms differ according to whether 
the creature is sensitive or not. As to the real reason why 
neither sensitive nor insensitive creatures perish in the par- 
oxysms we may say this: no living creature can exist without the 
spiritus vitae, which is the living strength of all things, as we 
have said in De Spuritu Vitae—nor is there any life [and that 
includes any maintenance of the spiritus vitae] possible without 
nourishment. Since everything that is alive may be affected 
by this disease, the illness may also be in certain food. When 
such food is mixed with the spiritus vitae, the trouble is brought 
about. This is one of the causes of the disease. The boiling of 
vapors in the spiritus vitae (but not in other humors and 
qualities which are also in the body) is another cause. If the 
Spiritus vitae is shifted from its right disposition, it boils and 
effervesces, and this happens so quickly that memory and reason 
are destroyed. This boiling may be compared with the approach 
of an earthquake, which makes the whole earth tremble. Earth- 
quakes and falling sickness have the same causes. Falling sick- 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 145 


ness is not a disease coming from nature in its regular course, 
or from ill health of the organism or destruction of the humors, 
but solely from the same causes as earthquakes, for the motion 
of the earth is also the motion of man and is experienced by 
all which grows on the earth. In our Philosophia we discuss 
the cause of the earthquake, which is the same cause as that 
of falling sickness in the body. If the living spirit boils due 
to faults in its properties, it produces vapors which make the 
whole body tremble. For if the living spirit lies down and 
suffers, the whole body lies down and suffers, not in bodily 
ill health but in insanity. Reason resides in the living spirit 
and is in the process of being destroyed until its destruction 
is complete, when vapor and brewing are no longer possible. 
Trembling, falling, foaming, and spasms of the limbs are 
caused because the living spirits of the patients are ill, and 
therefore the patients too are suffering. 

The distinctions between the five different kinds of falling 
sickness are certainly clear. The first, in the head, can be 
explained as follows: the spiritus vitae boils in the head only, 
and there the illness starts; if the spiritus vitae causes vapor 
and corruption there, unconsciousness and insensitiveness result 
and carry away all reason. Then all limbs are weakened, because 
the root of the human being is suffering. Just as the earth- 
quake takes place in one part but shakes everything within its 
reach, the disease is in the head only but afflicts all that it 
touches. It is the same with the liver: brewing and vapor creep 
into the spiritus vitae in the liver, and before the spiritus vitae 
can be felt it has reached the head and the whole body like 
a wind blowing along the roads. A piece of sodium, small 
though it may be, when it falls into vinegar makes everything 
boil ; the action of the spiritus vitae is just as quick. The spiritus 
vitae is in the heart too. It boils and foams in the chamber of 
the heart, but, just like that kind of earthquake which does not 
make the soil barren, it is unable to cause poisoning unless the 
upper parts be broken by the shaking and trembling. Just like 
an earthquake wrecking a house, this breaking-up, however, is 
not due to the poison of the spiritus vitae but to its motion. 

at 


146 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


The same is true if the spiritus vitae has its roots in the intes- 
tines or in the abdomen. For the disease has a root from which 
it grows just as the herb has a seed which falls off, dies, and 
grows again. There is a root in the spiritus vitae as well, which 
brings forth a growth which causes such a disease. This root 
may be found in the whole body, wherever it may have been 
planted: if in the head, then it grows from the head—if in the 
liver, then the sickness grows from the liver—if in the chamber 
of the heart, then it starts from the heart. It is the same with 
the abdomen, where the spiritus vitae may be rooted in the 
intestines or in some other part. It remains where it is rooted 
and does not appear in any other part, because it has only one 
root. Sometimes the seat is in the limbs, the hands or feet, 
and will be felt in these parts in the beginning, from which it 
will rise up into the whole body by means of the spiritus vitae. 
It sometimes happens that this root is planted in the body but 
is unable to stay fixed because it is not very substantial or 
material. Consequently, it pervades the body and attacks reason. 

Now that we have mentioned the location and causes we shall 
discuss the way in which the spiritus vitae may cause poisoning, 
so that sometimes there are paroxysms and sometimes there 
are none, and so that there is no sickness between the par- 
oxysms. The disease begins in the mother’s womb where it 
takes root; it is implanted in the children and grows with them. 
Weakness of the seed, slovenly habits and excesses cause the 
spiritus vitae in the child to be not as perfect as it should be 
and also make the ill health of the spiritus vitae a heritage. If 
a child is thus burdened and the spiritus vitae remains unim- 
paired, the latter will fight the disease until it reaches one place 
from which it can be expelled in the easiest way. The dis- 
ease is not always immediately manifest, because the root is 
not always strong enough or large enough to show its noxious 
quality, but it does grow and does become stronger so that 
seventy years later it may be recognized. There are still other 
reasons for this: the fact that the nature and health of the 
body, and of other things that are in man, are in good condi- 
tion and good order. Sometimes the disease appears after a 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 147 


shock, but the shock is not the cause of the disease, which had 
been lying, together with the root, and was merely inflamed 
by the shock, which causes the spiritus vitae to swell and boil. 
Joy may cause the disease too, by modifying that spiritus vitae 
which has an inclination toward disease. There are other inci- 
dents which may cause it, and in the following instance we see 
one reason why the disease does not remain and cause the 
trembling constantly: movements occur in the field of the 
influence which impair, weaken, diminish, or increase the 
spiritus vitae, and it is manifest after the root has grown, 
increasing in accordance with its strength and disposition. 

In the other methods we shall describe what else should be 
known and remembered about this illness. In them we say 
that the disease cannot be healed in the root, but that it is quite 
possible to stop the growth of the root, just as the growth of a 
tree which has been felled and remains with its roots in soil 
but not in nature is stopped, as will be told hereafter. 


CHAPTER TWO 


On Mania 


Now we must speak about mania, which is a transformation 
of reason and not of the senses. Perception is forced upon the 
senses, and there is no judgment at all. Mania has the following 
symptoms: frantic behavior, unreasonableness, constant rest- 
lestness, and mischievousness. It may be recognized by the 
fact that it subsides by itself and reason returns; mania may 
disappear and recur several times, or it may never recur. Some 
patients suffer from it depending on the phases of the moon, 
others after some external accident. Thus we have two kinds 
of mania and, likewise, two causes: one coming from the 
healthy body and one from other diseases. Both kinds are 
kindled in the same matter and in the same way, as follows: 
the matter from which mania grows is a distilled humor which 
enters the head, after being mixed below the diaphragm, above 


148 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


the intestines; another mixing takes place between the dia- 
phragm and throat, going directly to the head. There are two 
matters in the body that by being distilled are able to cause 
mania. In the extremities distillations may take place too, mov- 
ing upward through canals and pores. Only from these three 
can mania come. 

We must distinguish between the manias, for each distilla- 
tion has a special origin and effect, one being more dangerous 
than another. Thus the distillation coming from below the 
diaphragm makes the patients almost mad and senseless. They 
fall down quickly, do not want to eat, vomit a great deal, and 
suffer from diarrhea; they speak to themselves, do not take 
notice of other people or of their surroundings. This is because 
this mania is produced from excrements, which dissolve and 
are sublimated and lead to the symptoms described above. The 
mania which grows above the diaphragm is very grave and is 
accompanied by much pressure around the heart and pain in 
the chest, because the matter is distilled there too and rises and 
therefore causes such pressure. The mania which comes from 
the limbs makes the patients gay and joyful and also quite 
wild, because nothing is felt in the inner organs. They become 
gay and wild and frantic. Although there are other symptoms 
by which mania can be recognized, there is no need to describe 
them. There are two manias: the first, in which the distilla- 
tion penetrates the head and remains there like a vapor, will 
remain as long as there is such a vapor; the second is sublimated 
in the head, not by distillation but by coagulation, and it 
remains there undissolved. 

Therefore, for the cure we have to distinguish two kinds of 
mania: one caused by distillation, the other, which has to be 
dissolved and consumed, caused by sublimation. Although 
there are two kinds of “ elevation’ of manias into the head, 
they rise from one basis. There are three kinds of mania but 
there are many more ways in which it can appear: some dis- 
tillations and sublimations take place exclusively in the blood 
of the veins of the extremities, some only in the tendons and 
nerves of the limbs. Therefore, we have to distinguish between 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 149 


two paths of mania in the extremities: one through the blood, 
and the other through the nerves and tendons. Sometimes the 
mania which comes from the extremities is not in the whole 
limb but only in the blood or in the nerves and tendons, and is 
distilled upward through them. Such distillation. comes first 
to the heart and then to the head, because the veins and arms 
lead the distillation and sublimation to their origin, from which 
the mania rises. The mania above the diaphragm may rise from 
the stomach and, after having dissolved the phlegm in it or the 
matter lying in it, go up into the head. The liver and the lungs 
may also cause such distillation and sublimation. It is the same 
with the intestines and with the kidneys: some distillation or 
sublimation comes from the salt, some from the spiritus dis- 
tillatus, some from the mucus in the intestines and from other 
things contained therein. Thus, each can give mania a separate 
name. 

Now we shall relate what causes mania, how it can be dis- 
solved and how it becomes sublimated and distilled, and we 
shall speak of its origin. It is caused by great heat in two ways. 
One is hot like fire. If the matter from which mania comes 
vibrates into chalk which dissolves in a very corrosive water, 
this corrosive solution sets the humor vitae afire, and this causes 
a separation of the rough from the fine. The fine parts are 
so sharp that they go up as far as they can, while the rough 
remain below. Such vibration is caused by great heat in these 
places, which rises and burns until it makes these fine substances. 
Just as there are various kinds of fire there are also various 
kinds of solutions, differing in the blood from those in other 
parts in such a way that the spiritus salis, which is in the blood, 
mixes and becomes one with the spiritus vitae. Now we can 
understand why the distilled humors which rise in the heat of 
the other limbs are so fine and sharp and cause insanity on 
touching the particles of the brain. For this reason, if the 
spiritus is distilled only in the blood it will come out if the 
veins are correctly bled. If, however, it is not distilled in the 
blood alone but in the whole head, no bleeding will help, as we 
mention later in speaking of the cure. It often happens that 


150 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


by opening fingers and toes mania can be made to disappear, 
because coolness and air are thus admitted which prevent the 
matter from getting warm and rising. If this does not always 
or completely help, it is because the matter cannot be cooled 
sufficiently to let out the distillation. If mania is in the veins, 
bleeding will not help either. In that case one has first of all 
to find the origin and start at that end, as we shall indicate 
later in discussing the cure. Further, mania which sublimates 
and coagulates in the head makes worms grow there, due to the 
putrefaction of the light sublimation; sometimes there is an 
ulcer if too much hard substance is congealed, sometimes there 
is pus all through the head. This causes much gnawing and a 
stinging pain in the head, with much nasal mucus. Also, it 
often happens that such solutions in the head are consumed 
again, except for a tiny drop which by itself may cause mania 
if it lies in a significant place. If the matter does not dissolve, 
however, it remains coagulated and burns and gnaws—as when 
salt is put into a wound—and it deprives man of reason. 

The place where mania is originally located, which we can 
indicate and understand only in a general way, cannot be 
absolutely determined. The sublimation may start in the 
stomach alone, even though the stomach is small, and in not 
the whole stomach, but only one part. But if the whole stomach 
is given a medicament and the medicament works, mania is 
removed too. It will then be noticed that this cannot be done 
in the case of the veins, because somtimes the mania rises in 
one vein only and sometimes in all. The same is true of the 
nerves and tendons. As far as the liver, lungs and spleen are 
concerned, the whole organ should be given the cure. We must 
also bear in mind that the ancients, our ancestors, said that 
there were four constitutions which caused such mania. We 
cannot understand why melancholy should be a cause. If mel- 
ancholy were a cause the melancholic part would be the only 
one to suffer; the same would be true if yellow bile were the 
only cause, and this could be cured; and it is the same with 
blood and phlegm. But according to our experience this is 
not so. For if mania starts in three places of the body it can- 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON tt 


not come from one source, for it would then seem not properly 
distributed. Also, if mania came from constitutions, as has 
been proposed, no distillation or sublimation from the external 
limbs to the head could take place. For none of the constitu- 
tions has the disposition to become fine enough to numb the 
head. Mania begins in those limbs where no complexion [con- 
stitution] rules. If this is the case it cannot be derived from 
the constitution, as we have stated in De Complextombus. 
Insanity may come from an organ where melancholy rules, 
such as the spleen—not, however, because of the melancholy, 
but because of the spiritus vitae which in the way described by 
us separates from melancholy and rises. Therefore, mania 
comes only from the spiritus vitae and in consequence of sub- 
limation and distillation in the head, as has been said. Also, 
the insanity coming from the gall is not due to the yellow bile 
therein. As we must go on to speak of other things, we shall 
state our conclusion that the spiritus vitae and all matters from 
which mania comes are of one nature, quality, complexion, and 
are alike in one being; one is not hot, another humid, another 
cold, another dry, but all equally bring mania, because the 
matter is so fine and sharp that it clouds the brain and through 
it the cells of reason. Thus man becomes maniacal. 

Now we have to consider the period of insanity and also the 
gestures which might perhaps indicate that the disease came 
from the influence or the qualities, which is not the case. For 
it is quite possible that it increases and decreases with the 
influence, but it does not come from the increase or diminish- 
ing of the influence. As we state in De Influentiis Humanis, 
the influence does not rule our body materially or physically, 
but our innate influence does. Thus we state in De Mamia that 
it comes from the human influence which is both in us and those 
above, of which we do not speak here. From the gestures 
(which do not come from qualities) one might be led to believe 
that the maniac who mumbles is a melancholic, which is not the 
case, or that one who wants to fight and kick is choleric, which 
is not true either. The gesture and behavior come from the 
fact that such a melancholic, who by his nature has been a 


152 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


natural melancholic, becomes a maniac. The maniacal sub- 
stance irritates his former behavior and the gestures inherent 
in his nature and makes them apparent. For mania incites 
secret gestures and qualities which men have hidden in 
themselves. 

There is also a mania which does not indicate the nature 
of man; on the contrary, his nature is against it and rebels. 
Therefore, watch how the nature of man displays itself, for it 
often happens that the constitution of man becomes manic and 
he attempts to expel the mania. In such cases the natural quali- 
ties of mania are also seen. It follows that, as we stated in the 
beginning, mania does not result from the qualities, as it appears 
to. Those manias which develop from sublimation of spiritus 
vitae and the like are not due to melancholy, but merely show 
the same symptoms as melancholia, etc. 


CHAPTER THREE 


On the Origin of Truly Insane People 


In previous chapters I have spoken of the deprivation of 
reason, but it is not the case that patients remain without reason 
until they die. They suffer from attacks time and again, so 
that they lose their reason and then regain it, as we have indi- 
cated. Now we shall speak of those who are permanently 
insane and of insane body, rather than of those subject to 
recurring attacks. The period is irregular, once long, then 
short, in correspondence with the stars; it does not always 
occur, behave, and stay in the same way, but is irregular in 
accordance with the course of the stars. 

There are four kinds of insane people: Lunatici, Insam, 
Vesam and Melancholici. Lunatici are those who get the dis- 
ease from the moon and react according to it. Imsam are those 
who have been suffering from it since birth and have brought 
it from the womb as a family heritage. Vesani are those who 
have been poisoned and contaminated by food and drink, from 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 155 


which they lose reason and sense. Melancholici are those who 
by their nature lose their reason and turn insane. We must, 
however, note that apart from these four kinds there is another 
kind: these are the Obsessi who are obsessed by the devil; the 
various ways in which this happens are treated by us in De 
Spiritibus. But here we deal with those who are insane by nature, 
and sufferers of these four kinds cannot become obsessed by 
the devil and his company, as many people say; for the devil 
and his crew do not enter an insane body which is not being 
ruled by the entire reason according to its quality. Therefore, 
the devil does not enter those four kinds of insane people for, 
due to causes that will be explained later, they have no power 
of reason. While they are out of their senses they are possessed 
by, but safe against, the devils and Vatis, as we have said. The 
reason for this will be given in the proposed chapter De 
Spiritibus et Vatis. Although there are four kinds of insanity, 
each with a separate origin and derivation, they all end in 
depriving man of his reason, not in the same way, as we 
announce in the first four chapters, but without any other disease, 
so that there is no pain, as in epilepsy, in mamia, in chorea lasciva, 
in suffocationis intellectus ; but these people always live in mad- 
ness and, in the cases in which it is apparent that there is going 
to be another sick day, increasing insanity. When reason 
announces such sick days, death is not far, because the origin 
of the disease is so violent that it hurts the spiritus vitae and 
poisons it, and death results. 

Now we shall take up the lunatics and the reason for their 
disease, so that the discussion of them in the second chapter 
on Methods of Cure will be understandable. The stars have the 
power to hurt and weaken our body and to influence health and 
illness. They do not fall into us materially or substantially, but 
influence reason invisibly and insensibly, like a magnet attract- 
ing iron, or a scarab dust, or asphalt fibers and wood. Such 
power of attraction is possessed by the moon, which tears rea- 
son out of man’s head by depriving him of humors and cerebral 
virtues. The moon does not enter us and work in us, as has 
been affirmed, for no star has the power to possess us, as many 


154 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


state falsely; but we must believe that it takes reason from 
us as the stars do by virtue of their power of attraction. Just 
so the sun takes the humidity out of the earth, not by entering 
the earth and driving out the water as if it had been poured 
into fire, but by attracting it. Not only the moon acts thus; 
many planets deprive the organs of the whole body of their 
humors, as we discuss not here but in De Astris et Superioribus. 
Thus many people are deprived of their senses only by the 
moon’s attraction which takes out the cerebral humor so that 
the whole head rages without reason. Those lunatics are ruled 
by the moon. The power of attraction is at its height during 
the full moon, and therefore it attracts most strongly and the 
lunatics suffer most then. It is somewhat the same with the 
new moon, because the newly conceived moon has new virtues 
which cause greater or lesser insanity; it is not that the moon 
because of its weakness weakens the limbs, as if all our power 
lay in the moon, as we shall point out in De Firmamento. But 
owing to the unusual nature of the moon there are various 
degrees of attraction. It so happens that the humor is drawn 
out of the brain when the moon is smallest. The explanation 
is that the new moon does not draw out the same humor as the 
old one: the new moon draws out the body’s humor less than 
the old moon, which is rough and hard and therefore draws out 
the rough and hard humor. Just so, a young fire which has no 
great burning capacity does not drive out oils and hard sub- 
stance, while a great fire takes out hard and soft. When the 
sun rises it takes away only the moisture which is not heavy but 
light, while at noon the heavy waters are taken. The removing 
of moisture is more noxious to the earth and its strength than 
the removal of the rough, great humidity, due to reasons given 
by us in On Dew. The sun at noon absorbs dew and fine 
particles, rough particles, and vapors. But this is not the case 
with the moon; it is not in its nature and quality. When it 
first comes out it takes the fine humor from the brain so that 
the full moon is compelled to take the rough, for nothing fine 
is left; under the waning moon the humor grows like dew at 
night, and when the moon is on the increase it is driven out 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 155 


again. Many people are more insane and frantic during the 
waning moon than during the waxing moon, because the full 
moon has already taken the humor from them and they suffer 
more acutely the more the moon wanes. Just so the splitting 
of the earth from lack of humor cannot take place in the fore- 
noon but only in the afternoon after the sun at noon has taken 
away the humidity. It may happen with man that his insanity 
shows only at the end of the moon’s period. There are various 
reasons why the powers of nature struggle increasingly until 
they can do no more. While the moon exerts its attraction, as 
long as there is humor in the head it will draw it out. This is 
the main reason for its drawing out and attracting most at the 
end of its period, and this explains why the end is most trouble- 
some for those who begin the sick days of their nature during 
the moon. 

In the same way we can explain those people who have 
received insanity from the mother’s womb as a heritage, such 
as a family which is insane or a child who has been born insane: 
the seed and its function may be defective, or it may be inherited 
from the part of father or mother. The first reason is that the 
sperm in itself and in the operation may be lacking in the 
power of matter which makes and builds the brain. If the 
matter of a limb dissolves, its proper shape and nature dissolve 
too, as we have said in De Generatione Hominis in Volume 
One of our Philosophy. Tf there is such a deficiency in the 
sperm, reason is not complete since matter is not complete; 
therefore, there cannot be completeness of reason in the child. 
There is another cause for insanity in people, which is produced 
during the development; if, at its height, the power of attraction 
of the moon interferes with the generation and conception of 
the child, the moon can take away reason, so that complete 
sanity can never be restored. Such deprivation does not happen 
every day, although the moon rises every day, because the 
matter and the moon must be in accord with each other, and 
not every cerebral humor can be attracted by the moon, only 
the one adjusted to it, as we have stated in De Generatione 
Humana. If it does happen, the deprivation of the senses takes 


156 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


place too. The moon can take away man’s reason at birth; 
when, however, this is hereditary, the circumstance is such 
that if there is insanity in the brain, the child’s mother also has 
some deficiency in her brain, for the brain of the parents is 
continued in the brain of the son, as we have said in De Genera- 
tione Hominis, because the nature and qualities of the one 
originate in those of the other. This does not always happen, 
because the sperma become mixed, and either the man or the 
woman may or may not be insane, and the child may follow 
the insanity or take after the one who has the greater influence. 
It may even happen that if both are insane they still would give 
birth to a healthy child. This is due to the power of nature, 
which drives out the impediments and adversities. 

Now we must also speak about Vesani who become insane 
from eating and drinking. It often happens that food offered 
by whores causes deprivation of the senses, and this in many 
ways. Such insanity may lead to love, so that the Vesani put 
all their being into the whores; some are bent on war only, and 
therefore they have to do with war only, and there is no sanity; 
some climb and run; some act in various ways which we do 
not wish to enumerate and shall not describe, but which should 
be remembered. Let us not be amazed that it should be possible 
for food to cause this, for it is possible ; and much less should we 
be astonished at the effects they produce. And why? Because 
food and drink have affected them greatly. Now we shall 
describe the fourfold insanity that comes from food and drink; 
we shall have more to say about it in the chapter On Treatment. 

First of all, there are those that have so eaten and drunk 
that they have to and are compelled to love a woman. We shall 
leave out a few points here. If a person offers something to 
eat to another, whether man or woman, unbreakable, eternal 
love is the result; for this reason some servants give food to 
their masters so as to flatter them and to make love spring up in 
them, with the result that servants are above the masters, as 
we shall mention in De Republica. Further, unreasonable 
animals, dogs and others, can be brought to such love for those 
who offer it to them. It is natural that women should give 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 157 


such things to men, so that the latter should think only of 
making love to them; and they have no reason, and their melan- 
choly is directed toward those women who have offered it. 
We shall leave it at that, because of other proposed topics. 

The others who are bent only on war have been given some 
food intended to make them insane, and if they are choleric 
by nature they think only of war; their insane behavior has 
been given them through the food. We must also speak about 
the melancholic and phlegmatic ones, who exhibit their nature 
and constitution in like behavior. 

The third, who jump up and run around all the time, have 
received their insanity from eating the kind of thing that gives 
them an urge to mount and climb; this comes from the nature 
of this food and not from that of man. If it were up to us to 
write about it we would reveal everything here, but some 
things must remain unmentioned as there exists a great body 
of philosophy and contemplation on the nature of this insanity, 
and that must suffice. 

The same is true of the fourth kind, which we shall not 
describe at all; it may deprive man of his reason in the way 
described above. Some incantations are able to do the same; 
we shall not describe that here but put it under De Influentus. 
After the first accounts in this chapter we shall speak about 
melancholy persons, of whom there are four kinds. If such 
complexions deprive man of his reason, it is due to their driv- 
ing the spiritus vitae up toward the brain so that there is too 
much of it there. We shall not speak of this here but leave 
it to those who write on philosophy. 


FROM THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE FIRST BOOK 


On St. Vitus’ Dance 


We do not wish to admit, in this chapter, that the saints can 
cause a plague or the diseases which eventually are named after 
them. In our opinion, such diseases have nothing to do with 


158 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


the works of the saints. There are many who connect great 
sufferings with saints and attribute their sufferings to God 
rather than nature. This is idle talk. We dislike talk behind 
which there is no proof but mere belief. Belief is an inhuman 
thing and the gods do not think much of it. As this disease 
is known under the name of a saint, we do not intend to change 
the name; it should, however, rather be called chorea lasciva, 
for reasons which will be given. We discard unproven words 
which speak of God without knowing Him and digress from 
His given path by which He may be recognized. Thus the 
cause of the disease, chorea lasciva, is a mere opinion and idea 
assumed by the imagination, affecting those who believe in such 
a thing. This opinion and idea are the origin of the disease 
both in children and adults. In children the cause is also an 
imagined idea, based not on thinking but on perceiving, because 
they have heard or seen something. The reason is this: their 
sight and hearing are so strong that unconsciously they have 
fantasies about what they have seen or heard. And in such 
fantasies their reason is taken and perverted into the shape 
imagined. Moreover, in adults who do not imagine the dance 
but hear and see it, hearing and sight become stronger than 
reason. 

Even people who do not have such sight and hearing are 
afflicted with the dance; they are overcome by this kind of danc- 
ing and joy. The cause is in the laughing veins which compre- 
hend their spirit in such a subtle way that they are tickled into 
dancing and joy. There are two causes for this disease, for this 
dance: a natural one from the laughing veins, and an incidental 
one from the imagination. The natural origin of the dance is 
this: everyone has laughing veins; if these veins are opened 
and bled, the person begins to laugh and cannot stop while 
he is bleeding. If the bleeding continues he will laugh until 
he dies. Such veins are the cause and origin of this disease, 
and this is what happens: the veins remain complete and 
uninjured unless the spiritus in them on which they live and 
feed should be modified and separated and thus digress from 
its course and order; then it jumps and makes the blood rage; 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 159 


this causes a ticklish feeling, then laughter, which in turn 
makes the spirit in the veins stir more and more, for the veins 
lie at ticklish ends and spots and it is in their disposition and 
nature to make one laugh. The reason for the spiritus vitae’s 
moving and breaking is the fact that it is a fine spiritus. The 
life of those veins can no longer be regarded as natural. Just 
as brandy left to itself becomes sharper, finer, and lighter from 
the warmth in the wineskin, the spiritus vitae in the veins 
becomes fine and sharp from natural warmth, and as a result 
the blood changes so that it has the same quality as ordinary 
wine after its substance has been changed by mixture with 
brandy. 

We must consider the origin of the spiritus vitae in those 
veins, what makes it ailing or disposed to become so fine and 
sharp—for it is not in its natural disposition to do so. The 
cause that incites it to become so fine and to move the blood 
into the disease is this: the blood contains a salt which has a 
natural disposition to turn sour, sharp, bitter, or sweet, depend- 
ing on circumstances. The material and physical parts of the 
body are inclined to change, just as wood putrefies or turns 
into ashes or coal by itself or by accident. The salt is changed 
in the same way. The change makes the spiritus vitae heated 
and frantic, not because it is hurt—for it has no body—but 
because it is resting in an unnatural place; just as camphor 
cannot remain unchanged in a dirty place, so salniter cannot 
stand its counterpart in fire. Another kind of dance may 
result from stimulation which originates from vision and 
hearing, in this way: joy in man comes from the heart; vision 
and hearing are things that go to the heart. If I hear someone 
whistling, something I like by nature, I feel joy in my heart. 
This joy is twofold: I have a feeling of pleasure as is my 
natural disposition, and, besides, I have the image in my senses 
as if I see the person whistling before me. And while I am 
pressing that whistling into my thoughts it gives me pleasure, 
and joy prevails in my heart; as it stands before me it impresses 
itself upon me while all other qualities, blood, and dispositions 
are driven from me, so that they are suppressed and have no 


160 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


further effect. This is followed by the deprivation of senses, 
but not of reason. If my power of reason is taken from me 
and, due to my imagination, I act in the same way as I would 
if I had noticed or watched the whistling, my lack of will is 
the cause of my disease. And it is natural that such lack of 
will, in which a person indulges with joy and with all his heart, 
causes such imaginations, as we have described in De Imagina- 
tiontbus. This obviously is one of the reasons why whores 
and scoundrels who take pleasure in guitar and lute playing, 
who satisfy all voluptuousness, bodily pleasure, imagination 
and fancy, never escape but become ill in such a way that they 
jump and dance, thus applying what has been their occupation. 
This dance which we find in whores does not come from 
nature nor have a natural cause in the laughing veins, such as 
we have described in the beginning of this chapter, but it 
comes from recklessness and disgraceful living in which there 
is neither reason nor sense. It is for these reasons that they 
behave so disgracefully and unreasonably. But there are also 
many who do not lead such a disgraceful, inhuman life, who 
do not think of it, and therefore would neither want nor enjoy 
dancing; they dance without thinking. The cause is the laugh- 
ing veins of which we have spoken. The dance also comes with 
laughing, howling, screaming, or jumping—sometimes only 
with laughing and walking. The cause is again in the laughing 
veins, with only the difference that the spiritus vitae does not 
change—the blood is not poisoned but is inflamed, and it sub- 
sides after a while. Now we can also understand in what way 
much of the joy comes from the heart: the heart feels a salted 
spiritus which stimulates it to laugh, and the heart is power- 
fully inflamed by the spiritus vitae in the laughing veins. For 
the same reasons joy may befall the heart just as illness may 
the spleen; both are possible. It may also happen that such joy 
in the spiritus vitae rises into the head, takes possession of it 
and then acts accordingly. In such cases the patients have no 
great urge toward, or pleasure from, dancing; they are willing 
to perform what you want them to do, and this without sense 
or reason. The other dancers, however, are forced by their 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 161 


illness to dance, jump and scream with many gestures. Now 
we can understand why they have to jump and dance, etc., in 
the way we described in On Imagination and Fancy. The 
natural cause is in the laughing veins which have a quality 
which makes a person jump, laugh, etc., if he gets tickled at the 
ticklish ends; and the same tickling happens in the veins, which 
contain even more laughing, tickling, and jumping, for their 
life is inflamed and is boiling within them. The dance of this 
disease is also a modification of reason, because joy takes the 
lead and changes all other qualities. It does not poison, or 
deprive the patient of, memory, but memory does become dis- 
turbed, and it is suppressed and hindered by the disease. 

We shall have to speak about the duration of this disease: 
the disease appears for a period which is sometimes long, 
sometimes short, depending on the quantity of the matter and 
on the disposition, by which it announces itself, grows, and 
rises. Now we shall come to a close concerning this disease 
of the dance. We must not underrate the power of the gods 
who are able to punish a voluptuous person with such disease. 
The nature and origin of the disease cannot be removed or 
changed, for such disease is an actuality. In De Plaga Dei we 
shall say more about this illness, and at the end of the chapter 
De Cura Chorea Lascivae we shall give further details about 
the dance. 


FROM THE FOURTH CHAPTER OF THE FIRST BOOK 


On the Origin of Suffocatio Intellectus 


There are also several kinds of deprivation of reason, coming 
from natural diseases, which make man insane. There are three 
of them: one that happens only to those who have worms in 
their intestines, a second that comes only to women from the 
womb, a third that befalls both man and woman from lying 
or sitting or through overeating and overdrinking. There is 
another that comes from sleep and subsides by sleep. Therefore 


12 


162 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


we have two types: one beginning in a state of consciousness— 
so that the patient know what is happening to him, and the 
other in an unconscious state—which comes from outside and 
makes the patient ill without anyone’s noticing it. One has to 
know more about this than about any other illness leading to 
a deprivation of senses, because the patient’s life may be lost 
if the doctor has not insight and knowledge. It is not as if 
reason carried death, but the disease which takes reason away 
also destroys life. To those who have worms, as we mentioned 
in De Vermibus, death comes with a convulsion; also, the life 
of women can be squeezed out if the womb is contracted, and 
many other things. Death may also be caused by lying and 
sitting because the air is taken from the heart, as we have 
stated in De Introitu Mortis. In this disease there are many 
symptoms by which future good and bad, life or death may be 
recognized. For the patients fall down in just the same way 
as in epilepsy and have cramps which cause contraction and 
extension; such gestures are equally distributed among the 
patients and are the very sign of the disease. The deprivation of 
reason does not always appear with such shock and trembling, 
but sometimes with a quiet sleep, sometimes with a disturb- 
ance of reason, for there are many varieties of this suffocation 
—and it can always rise and grow again. As to the worms, they 
can grow and lie in many different places and are therefore 
apt to cause many severe, strong convulsions. This is also true 
of the other varieties of deprivation of reason. 

We find this suffocation in two places: in the mother’s 
womb and in the belly. It can also be limited to the head, but 
in this case it is not caused by nature but comes incidentally, 
from blows or wounds which are its cause and motive, as we 
shall explain later. First we have to understand how suffoca- 
tions originate. There are two ways: one by smoke, in which 
case a headache follows the convulsion because remainders 
are left in the head and change its sensibility ; a second by draw- 
ing the air toward the heart, in which case the patients suffer 
from a sickness around the pit of the stomach if the latter con- 
tains some substance from which worms may grow or have 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 163 


already grown. This substance, or the worms—if separated from 
the feces, or lying there and putrefying, or devouring each other, 
or sublimating the substance in the stomach, which then over- 
flows—cause a smoke which rises and clouds the brain and 
also the sleeping veins, so that the patients fall asleep without 
knowing it and dream under heavy, great pressure and with 
difficulty. The entire reason may disappear, depending on how 
the sleep is being disturbed, as we say in De Somno. For such 
an injury can also injure the brain, from which the insensibility 
of sleep comes. It is the same with the worms which are in the 
stomach and in the opening of the stomach. The worms in 
the belly lie in the intestines; they do not rise into the head as 
the stomach worms do, but produce their convulsion without 
any smoke and vapor to impair the head. Their smoke and 
formation cannot rise into the head for many reasons. This 
smoke and shape with its vapor injures the surroundings of 
the heart, however, so that the air and nutrition which go to 
the heart are poisoned. And if the heart receives them it 
chokes in them, and death may occur from so much noxious 
substance. This cannot happen in the head, and after the effect 
of the substance is gone complete health follows; but the con- 
vulsions succeed each other. If the heart suffers all living 
spirit suffers with it. This causes cramps, trembling, shudders, 
and tantrums with many other symptoms, resulting in an 
insensibility in the whole body, so that there can be neither 
sense nor reason—to such an extent do blood and humors 
boil and rage in the body and against each other. It is as if 
sulphur and sal mitre were put afire together. Unless the noxi- 
ous matter has been consumed, this insensibility does not stop 
or else it strikes at life itself. 

We have also to speak about the womb. It produces, though 
in another way, the same signs and symptoms as those appear- 
ing when the womb’s natural condition is changed into an un- 
favorable one, which change results in a contraction of the 
uterus and takes away all reason and sensibility. The cause is 
that the matter on which the womb is internally nourished and 
kept alive destroys itself, like wine turning into vinegar. If the 


164 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


womb neither feels nor has the proper substance, then the sub- 
stance has lost its right nature and is cold. This coldness 
causes a tension of the skin and of the lining of the womb, con- 
tracting it into a kind of spasm, for it is an inherent quality and 
innate nature that all acid and cold of that kind give a sort of 
spasm or stinging to the whole body, with the exception of the 
flesh and bone. This causes coldness and sharp acid in the 
uterus, resulting in cramps and contraction, making the uterus 
like a log. The contraction, the tetanus and the spasm also 
force the other limbs into spasms and tetanus, for they become 
contaminated by the womb also. If such contraction takes 
place in the veins of the whole body, vapor and smoke come 
out of the womb to the organs around it, and if it touches the 
heart the convulsion is similar to epilepsy with all its symptoms, 
and no other organ but the heart is afflicted with it. 

The third kind is another suffocation which happens in 
many and varying ways and which we cannot describe in all its 
details and varieties. One comes during sleep if one is lying on 
one’s back. The water of the heart sinks into the lower cham- 
ber and the heart above remains bare. Some people believe that 
this causes a weakening of the heart, for if the heart lies in 
any other place than in the water it deprives the patient of his 
senses; it rages and takes all power and strength out of the 
limbs—out of the blood which is being driven there. This 
belief is not correct, for the blood cannot do any harm to the 
heart except in other illnesses where one has to lie on one’s back, 
where it may have many causes. Some also believe that the 
blood retreats from the heart, so that it lies bare by this depri- 
vation, and it seems as if the sleeper could not move hands or 
feet. This is not so. For there are so many other reasons why 
the blood cannot flow away from the heart. This flow would be 
very injurious to the heart. The real reason is that, while one 
is lying on one’s back, the chamber is pressed flat, just like a 
bladder which is filled with water and can be squeezed. If 
the heart is bare, or touches the skin of the chamber, it causes 
pressure as if a heavy stone were lying on it. For there is 
much around the heart, the matter of which might fall on the 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 165 


center of the chamber, if one is lying on one’s bed and pressure 
is exerted. It cannot happen when one is lying on the side or 
on the belly, for reasons discovered in many ways in experi- 
ments in anatomy. So we need not go into them any further. 

There are still many other diseases in sleep which deprive 
man of reason and also make him frantic and wild, like falling- 
sickness. There are two causes: one is the same kind of pres- 
sure as in falling-sickness, the other is a pressure of the brain. 
This happens in the following way. If there is pressure on 
the heart so that the spiritus vitae grows hot, the whole body 
is inflamed and the pressure becomes so strong that it takes 
possession of reason and of heavy sleep, changing it into trem- 
bling and pain, as if it were epilepsy. It can also happen in 
the following way: if the disease returns to the belly again it 
does not leave the body. Why? Because the spiritus vitae is 
still frantic and raging. This is not felt in the morning after 
sleep, and after the convulsion the patient excretes a yellow 
water produced by the spiritus vitae during the frenzy. It may 
also happen that the spiritus vitae leaves all organs and lets 
them lie as if they were dead, and only in the heart, brain and 
liver is there any life; elsewhere there is none. The body seems 
then like a tree which has all its strength in its roots but seems 
dried up and rotten otherwise; yet strength may be restored to 
it. The spiritus vitae is also able to spread throughout the body 
from the center or from the root, after evaporation of the 
humors, and to call back life as before, as we shall say in the 
chapter on Cure. The same kind of pressure that we have been 
describing in the heart may also occur in the brain in so far as 
the sleeping veins can compress the brain and reason by their 
pressure—in the pra mater—just like a suffocation which com- 
presses the uterus in which the disease is rooted. 

This is the cause: sleep changes the whole head and presses 
the spiritus vitae into the brain until it evaporates; then it 
appears with all symptoms, spasms and trembling, as we have 
said about the heart and the uterus. Sleep can be injured still 
more easily than the heart, without loss of sanity. Intoxication 
can cause such suffocation too; this is to be understood in the 


166 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


same way as the worms in the stomach. It does not come from 
a matter in nature but in the following way. Drunkards have 
a fine spirit which by its sharpness can injure sleep and some- 
times the brain, as has been repeatedly reported. Intoxication 
can also cause mucus in the stomach similar to the matter of 
worms and having the same effect as worms. It can also happen 
through drink and food which do not contain such fine spirit— 
for example, thick sauce and water. The cause is an impurity 
in the sauce and in the water, which have an inclination to such 
disease. It is not in all thick sauces and waters, only in some: 
water which has been poisoned by worms and their excrements, 
for example, or vegetables on which poison has been poured, 
or mosses on which there is such excrement as has been 
described. 

It happens quite often that a sudden convulsion comes dur- 
ing sleep in the form of a suffocation or something similar, 
as has been reported. We do not write about it here, but leave 
this to others, for what is possible during the day is also possible 
during the night. It should be kept in mind that the course of 
the stars is also able to cause or remove such diseases. It often 
happens that, depending on their influence, such convulsions 
may or may not occur, for the spiritus vitae takes ill and becomes 
sad accordingly. ‘ 

There are still other deprivations of reason, without fits 
and frenzy, however. For example, one may sit and turn quite 
limp and fall down because the matters of this disease, as we 
have told, have not been able to inflame the spiritus vitae so 
quickly. Reason may be lost by incidental blows and similar 
things, as a wound on the head, which will cause fits of frenzy 
several times a year. This happens because the same influence 
rules the body and the stars, as has been explained in De 
Influentus. At the time when the influence reaches the head 
it also touches that blow and this causes frenzy at certain times. 
It may have other reasons too: the wound may be badly healed, 
pus may have accumulated, inflaming and injuring the brain. 
There may be still another reason: the wound may have healed 
together without fault, but the brain may have suffered such an 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 167 


injury by the blow that it can never heal again. It makes itself 
felt depending on time, weather, exercise, food and drink, and 
many other factors which need not be described as this will 
be reported in the chapter on Cure. Now we have said enough 
about suffocation. 


Tue SEeconp METHOD oF THEOPHRASTUS 


On SooTHING AND CuRING FALLING-SICKNESS 


THE FIRST CHAPTER 


Having described the origin of falling-sickness in the first 
part, we shall now undertake to explain its cure. Do not 
admire the power of the cure of this disease, for all diseases 
originating in the body have also a cure in medicine. Up till now 
it has been said that it is impossible to cure this disease 
because people did not know more about it or perhaps con- 
cealed something, as we shall later report. The basis upon 
which we found our medicine, and which has been given us by 
experience, is not to think back but to describe two kinds of 
medicine: one affecting its kind in a physical way, and one 
affecting its kind in a spiritual way. Thus we understand 
that there are two kinds of disease in all men: one material and 
one spiritual, which we explained in De Principus Sanitatis et 
Egritudimis. Against material diseases material remedies should 
be applied; against spiritual diseases, spiritual remedies. Thus 
we say that falling-sickness is a spiritual disease and not a 
material one, so that no material medicine would be of any 
help. Therefore, the remedy against a spiritual disease is, 
and must be, spiritual. There are no spiritual remedies except 
those especially made for it, as we shall indicate later in our 
practice. This can be understood best in two ways: first, there 
are some material remedies which cure spiritual diseases, as 
is done by the following prescription in new and very recent 
cases ; it is a material remedy and cures epilepsy: 


168 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Recipe for Epilepsy 
Take camphore, spodu, wnicornu, etc., fiat pulvis 


This should be offered in a soft-boiled egg, also the powder. 
Same compound also soothes certain epilepsies. Now we have 
indicated the material medicine against this grave illness. Its 
effect simply consists in an obstruction of the canals through 
which the disease is rising. Its effectiveness is also based on 
great cold, which makes the matter coagulate and die, so that it 
becomes insensible, like a frozen limb. This is done in the 
following way: take camphore, etc. There are some who cure 
it by the specific properties of paconia, viscus quercinus. Some 
make it insensible so that it cannot break out; this is done in the 
following way: take opi mandragore, etc. Such medicines are 
merely material ones. Therefore, they help in fresh cases only, 
where the disease has not yet got the upper hand. 

Now we shall proceed to the spiritual medicines which cure 
epileptic patients; the remedies we have mentioned before 
neither help with certainty, nor help intrinsically in all cases. 
We shall not follow the writings which are opposed to us or 
those which do not allow us to proceed in such a way, nor 
shall we put faith in them; for experience teaches us more than 
our opponents have understood or ever will understand. Nor 
shall we specify our cure in analepsy, catalepsy and epilepsy 
separately, but we shall regard it as one falling-sickness and 
practice accordingly; we shall not withdraw what we said on 
the origin of falling-sickness; our prescription will conform 
to that description. 

While we are describing the cure four points should be 
remembered : 


1. The medicine should become spiritual and fine; it should 
be a coagulation post spiritum. 

2. It should be administered with veins compressed. 

3. It should be made specific with appropriate means. 

4. It should be prepared from herbs which have a fine 
spirit and go through the entire body like an elixir or arcanum 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 169 


or like a quintessence. There is no other way of conquering the 
disease. The remedy must have the same strength as the disease. 


Now we shall enumerate the four points, what they include 
and what spiritual quality may be drawn from them to oppose 
the disease. First: 

Coagulants : 


Camphora, nenuphar, cristal, spodium, sinapis, sperma rana- 
rum, unicornu, coralli, mumia. 


Constrictiva: 


Bursa pastoris, verbena, salix, coralli, hypericon, rosae. 


Specifica: 
Viscus quercinus, poeonia. 


The subtlest spirits are these: vitriol. ungar., vitri. cupertinum, 
vit. romanum. If these four are in power, we find some others 
which have a marvelous effect if mixed into the spiritual spirits ; 
these are: opium optimum, mandragora, papaver, lolium, 
hyosciamus, uva versa. We do not utilize them in the way in 
which they appear, but according to the use and nature of 
Archidox preparations. We shall never be tired of describing 
the virtues of this preparation, which we shall be glad to explain 
in the following prescription. There are also other medicines, 
like medicamenta confortativa, which by their excellent sub- 
stance help nature to drive out falling-sickness. These are: 
aurum potabile, oleum auri, quinta essentia aurt, materia per- 
larum, corallorum solutio, magisterium antimonii, extractum 
sulphuris, mercurius reverberatus. These medicines have a 
wonderful power. It is hardly believable that such things 
should be hidden in nature, to cure diseases which cannot be 
cured in any other way. Therefore, we must not lose courage 
in medicine nor should we despair, for the creator of enemies 
has also created enemies against them. There is no disease 
with the power to kill, for all diseases are curable without 
exception, even those illnesses which we do not understand. 


170 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


And in De Morte et Vita we explain what death is. We do not 
intend to describe the making of these sedatives and calmants; 
they are perfect in themselves against such diseases. Therefore 
they do not need any improvement. The sedatives must have 
some preparation, but no other than that which we shall give 
in the prescription about them. Those are our first prescrip- 
tions, and they need a good artist who must not only be well 
read but who must be even more skillful, as we have said in 
our Archidoxis and Quintessentia. 

Much depends on what is shown and taught by experience; 
therefore, we cannot describe it in such detail here. This is 
something that has not been invented by the physicians, but by 
artists who are the initiators and conquerors of all subtle 
remedies. They are not called remedies or medicines but arcana, 
because of their wonderful and noble virtues. In our opinion 
it has not yet been shown what these qualities and virtues are, 
but we shall quote this arcanum for the cure of falling-sickness 
and shall say nothing of its other virtues. It should be kept 
in mind that preparations of it are manifold and varied, and its 
virtues are as manifold as its preparation. Not each arcanum 
has this virtue; the greatest power, however, lies in the prepara- 
tion and depends on the detail of the work. It is the same with 
the simplicia, if one must be more effective than the other. 
One is witriolum, which comes from Hungary, Cyprus, or 
Rome, which has been especially well graded and purified. Do 
not feel displeased or indignant at the force of the vitriol, 
for it has a certain secret quality, which is not physical but 
spiritual. It contains more excellent virtues than gold, as we 
have said in De Generibus Salium Terrae. The lauded spiritus 
of the vitriol is subtilized and separated from the dross in 
such a way that there is only a quintessence of vitriol and 
arcanum, which is comparable to aurum potabile. It is made in 
the following way: take well-graded, good vitriol (as we have 
indicated), as much as you like, but at least five pounds; put 
it into an earthenware retort which should be fireproof and so 
large that one third of it remains unfilled. This retort should 
be put on a very well-made athanar, one well covered with clay; 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON iat 


put on it a well-made alembic, hermetically covered with clay, 
and in front of it put a large receptacle, preferably with a 
pasted beak. Then, when it has dried, make a fire, slowly as 
is the alchemist’s habit, in order to notice the signs in the spirits 
and drops and to bring out all watery fluid. Drive the spiritus 
out with a mighty fire which usually takes two days and nights 
without interruption. And even though much studying and 
instruction is necessary, we do believe that enough has been 
said to the intelligent physician. Those who are not clever 
enough had better not understand it at all. Note, that all virtues 
go into the athanor from the vitriol, and that many mutations, 
spirits, and colors appear, due to the vitriol’s nature. 

Sometimes copper in the retort melts into a log; this is 
solely due to the vitriol. Sometimes it is the same with much 
gold; sometimes the entire vitriol melts into gold, sometimes 
it burns into red or black coal. Now, when the distillation has 
been completed, take a glass phial, pour in this distilled vitriol 
water, crush the caput mortuum into small pieces, put into it 
the distilled vitriol water; distill it again, so that all the glass 
melts together. Thus it inflames in that distillation the right 
and true effectiveness of its essences and the power or virtue 
of penetration. Then take it and separate it in aqua forti 
and the phlegm will disappear; an oil will remain, which is 
called olewm arcanum vitriolt. 

Note that we have great confidence in the phlegm which 
has been separated in this way, almost as much as in the oleum, 
for it emerges endowed with many virtues. We have also been 
accustomed to apply a mixture of both of them. Both have come 
to us from the arcana. The dose is half a scruple in good wine 
or water, every morning and night, until the convulsions sub- 
side. The oil is sufficient to cure falling-sickness, and we shall 
leave it at that; for it would be untoward to put here what we 
have learned about it, what has happened to us. There are still 
other ways and manipulations for the making of arcanum 
vitriolt: for instance, let the retort stand on a fire for several 
weeks ; or use lying flasks, retorts, putrefaction or much distilla- 
ation; or use much aquae ardentis, imbibitions, calcination, and 


172 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


similar things which we all praise and like. We do not deem 
it necessary to write about it here, for every good and honest 
physician knows enough about this and similar things. 

Now we shall have to leave the methods and shall proceed 
to the prescriptions as put in the beginning of the chapter, and 
this is what we say: Arcanum vitrioli should be taken as a base 
into which the following ingredients should be put: camphore, 
Spodu, rasure crane, unicornu, santalorum alborum, rubro- 
rum, citrimorum ana unciam unam, corallorum, visci quercinti, 
granorum peome, radicum peome ana uncias duas. These pieces 
should be crushed and pulverized to the smallest possible frag- 
ments and should be put into one pound of arcanum vitriol: ; 
then let the concoction rest for a month, in the above-described 
way. We consider that arcanum vitrioli is sufficient to heal all 
epileptics. Therefore, no prescriptions, composita or simplicia 
are needed. We use this compound because vitriol is of uneven 
quality, sometimes evaporated or not well graded; sometimes 
it has another blemish which causes an obstacle, so that its 
virtue is less than when it is perfect. Such damage may be 
caused by smoke and fire. Sometimes the alchemists make a 
mistake in its preparation, which is the root of the fault. 

Now we have to understand the way sedatives should be 
added. They are more useful than one might think, as for 
instance opium thebaicum and others. The preparation and 
mixing of the others is done as follows: 

Take opii thebaici 2 drachms, cinamom Y% ounce, musci 
ambre Y% scruple of each, corallorum ¥% ounce, mandragore VY 
drachm, succi hyosciami 1 drachm, masticis 3 drachms. Mix 
these, crush them, prepare a lozenge and add stewed hop-juice. 
Put the compound into a quince. Close it again, then put it 
into a dough and let it bake in an oven as if it were bread. Take 
it out and crush it, one half-ounce to five ounces of arcanus 
vitriolus. Now we have completed the whole cure for falling- 
sickness, and although there are still many more arcana, magis- 
teria, elixeria, etc., such as aurum potabile, aqua vitae, etc., 
which are all useful in the treatment of falling-sickness, they 
will not be described here, as we have mentioned them in De 
Quintessentia, and we shall leave it at that. 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 173 


DeE Cura MANIAE 


THE SECOND CHAPTER 


We must speak about mania in the same way as we have 
spoken about falling-sickness. There are two remedies which 
remove mania, one surgical and the other physical. It often 
happens that both are used. In the first place, we want to 
mention the surgical practice, and afterwards the physical one, 
and then also report on the experiments which belong to each. 
We think surgery difficult and truly advise that nobody use it 
unless he be well instructed in surgery and informed by his 
own experience in all incidents, which we describe in Libro 
De Extermis Curis. This is our practice of surgery: first, make 
an aperture at the place from which the mania rises; but if 
you are in doubt, open all extremities—at the toes, fingers and 
the head—in a circle which must be as wide as possible. This 
aperture is twofold: one which only lifts up the skin and 
removes it, so that the raw flesh remains underneath; the other 
which makes holes so that a scurf falls out and a hole remains. 
Now the use of one or the other should depend on the 
disease and thus, if the disease is strong and intense, the first 
opening of the skin is not sufficient to give an outlet to the 
origin of mania, but the second opening can, because it leaves 
more holes; each separate hole has the capacity to serve as an 
outlet. Therefore, both methods of aperture are given herewith: 


First Aperture: 


Take radicum flammulae recentiwm et aceto imbibitarum 
florum flammulae recentium in aceto imbibitorum ana lotos 
duos, pinguedims Meilaender keferli unum lot, cantharidarum 
drachmas sex, fermentt, aceti ana quantum sufficit. Crush them 
all and mix them well into an ointment. Spread it on a cloth 
over an area as large as your fingers can stretch and if it 
begins to dry, wet the cloth from the outside with vinegar, 
so that there be moisture; let it remain there for five to six 
hours, then take it off, and cut the blisters open and take the 


174 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


skin off, and you have the raw flesh on that spot. Now we 
shall describe the other aperture to be used, if the first cannot 
be manipulated. It follows herewith: 

Take two half-ounces of aqua fort, salis communis soluti 
Y ounce, mercuri sublimati 3 drachms. Mix them together in a 
glass, put the compound on a small fire, let it dissolve in water 
and wash the width of the extremities with it from one to six 
times. Then let it dry and the skin will come off, like powder. 
Each of the described apertures is sufficient for taking off the 
skin. We have sometimes taken off the skin and peeled it 
from the flesh; this we liked best, because the blood comes 
out with it which soothes mania to a great extent. Some have 
also had their extremities pricked open with spring-lancets. 
Pricking, however, does not seem to be sufficient to take out 
mania. Only a total aperture will do this. 

If you do not like to apply the described apertures, you 
should use the ulcerating aperture, which is done in the follow- 
ing way: 

Take mercurit sublimati, arsenici puri, aquae fortis, ana. 
Mix them into an ointment and tie it on the extremities until the 
sensitiveness subsides. Then mollify it with grease, so that 
the scurf comes off. After it has been removed, the other 
practice follows. If you have made these apertures, remember 
that the flow of mania should be extracted with all its substance, 
as we have explained in the chapter on Mania. This happens 
only by means of an attractivum, which must be put over the 
ulcerated extremities twice a day. It absorbs the illness, and in 
the end, after this absorption, it heals together as follows, and 
this is how the attractivum should be made: 

Take galbani, oppopanaci, serapini, bdellii, ammomaci, ana 
244 ounces, dissolve the mixture in aceto and stew it in its 
juice; then mix it with the following well-ground, finely 
strained species: 1% ounce masticis, 2 drachms thuris, 1 ounce 
carabe, half a handful of ungule caballine, 3 drachms magnetis, 
2 drachms colophonie, 5 drachms firnissi, fiat cerotum. 

Put that ointment on and fill the holes of the extremities 
well with it; renew the bandage, until you can perceive a 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 175 


decrease of the mania. Then let it heal together in the usual 
ways of surgery as we have said about apertures and attractiva. 
Note this remarkable thing: that the apertures of the head 
should be made last, after all the other exulcerations have been 
closed. Only if the need arises, open the head, too, and proceed 
in the way we have described. Thus we have instructions for 
curing mania in the indicated way by surgery. It should be 
remembered that there are also some veins which should be 
opened and bled. It happens that by such bleeding mania dis- 
appears, but we do not want to say more about it, as it is com- 
monly known. 

Now we shall continue and speak about the treatment of 
mania in the physical way, without applying surgery. Two 
phases of this cure should be remembered; one that cools off 
and congeals the noxious matter of mania, the other which 
soothes and kills the matter from which mania is born. At 
first we shall speak of those which cool and congeal mania. 
This may be done externally by application or internally by 
medicine. We describe the greater part of it in the chapter 
on the treatment of falling-sickness, and this is the description : 

Take 1 ounce olei camphore, 1 drachm olei musci, commisce ; 
give the patient half a drachm to be swallowed at once. It re- 
moves mania in a miraculous way, extinguishing the heat of the 
body and the raging of the blood and coagulating the matter, 
like water which freezes into ice. We have never come across a 
similar prescription. Such oil can be applied for external use 
too, on the temples and forehead. There are still many other 
remedies which take mania away by their great qualities and 
comfort, such as quinta essentia argenti, quinta essentia saturnt, 
solutio cristalli, quintum esse martis, quinta essentia antimomu, 
solutio corallorum, and other appropriate things such as extrac- 
tio camphore, extractio solis, etc. There is another way of 
curing mania by remedies that deaden it, so that it cannot be 
felt any longer. There are many of these and they may be 
used both internally and externally. Those which are made 
in the same way as quintessence are the best: for instance, 
summum anodinum, quintum esse mandragore, quintum esse 


176 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


opu, quintum esse papaveris, essentia lollit, hyosciamt. These 
are strong and powerful medicines; they are purified and 
cleaned out by the qualities of the quintessence to such a degree 
that no blemish or impurity can be found in them which might 
cause damage to the body. They raise and extract the sub- 
stance gently. This is not the place to reveal their virtues or 
to tell how they remove such grave and incurable diseases, 
but this is sufficiently disclosed in De Quinta Essentia. 

We shall finish about the cure of mania here. By this and 
by the medicines much will be learned, and much has been 
said about its cure. By experiments with herbs much has been 
discovered and invented against mania. We shall not burden 
ourselves with those, but apply quintessence and fluids which 
have always proved very useful. 


FROM THE FIFTH CHAPTER OF THE SECOND BOOK 


On the Treatment of Vesanias 


Now we shall write the fifth chapter, about insane persons 
and their cure. There are four kinds and we shall also give 
four cures. 

First we shall speak of the Lunatici; in this cure we prevent 
the attraction of the moon by confortativa, so that the Lunatici 
may offer resistance, like a roof which is put up against the 
sun, lest what is lying under the sun be disturbed in its existence. 
First, we must bear in mind that the power which the moon, 
as well as that of all other planets and influences which take 
strength from our bodies, holds over us, as well as the sun, 
can be taken away by the power of medicine. The moon is 
like a magnet which attracts all iron and steel. The power 
can be taken away from it as from the iron, for iron that has 
been covered with oleuwm mercuru will not be attracted by any 
magnet, nor will a magnet rubbed in leek ever attract anything. 
Thus we have to distinguish several medicines to use against 
the moon, some against Mars, some against the sun, some 
against all planets. Therefore, one should try to build up 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 177 


resistance against these influences by medicines which could 
be applied in correlation with the power of the moon, or with 
that of the other planets and stars. We write about it in more 
detail in De Quinta Essentia et Influenttis. There are seven 
planets. Therefore, if a planet destroys a corpus, the quintes- 
sence of the metal should be applied against it. For instance: 
quintessence solis against the sun, quintessence lunae against 
the moon, etc. It must be understood that quintessence solis is 
powerful against all planets, because of its specifica and the great 
power which it gives to the heart, by which all this is driven 
out, as we say in De Septem Membris and as has been reported 
sufficiently in De Lunaticts. 

We also want to describe the treatment for those persons 
who have brought insanity from the mother’s womb as a heri- 
tage. There are two cures: one is a preventive for the father 
and mother, so that insanity may not affect the child; it also 

is for the insane person himself. This first cure should be 
performed as follows, and be called rather a preventive or 
expulsive remedy than a cure: The parents should not perform 
a natural coitus but an artificial one. When they have the 
desire for intercourse this insanity is hidden and appears due to 
coitus, if the coitus has been performed during insanity. It 
leads to insanity. Then the child will be insane. If, however, 
no coitus is performed during the illness, but if coitus pre- 
ceeds the illness, the child will not be insane. From this it 
follows that one should not cohabit when feeling the desire 
for it, but should immediately jump into cold water; thus the 
desire for coitus will be expelled or extinguished. When the 
fervor has been extinguished the coitus should be performed 
artificially. It can be induced and stimulated by medicine. 
Then a natural act will follow consistent with nature and not 
with the spirit or the will of insanity. Thus, whenever one has 
the desire for coitus, it should be incited by medicine. It can be 
seen by this that nature in itself does not produce insanity, but 
is good. If the insanity is of a permanent nature, then the 
coitus can be prevented every day in the above-described man- 
ner, and if the first child is not perfectly free from insanity, 


13 


178 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


his children will be free from it through this method. It should 
be remembered that insane persons must be protected by quin- 
tessence before the coitus. In this way the genital organs are 
protected against things unsuitable and inconvenient, so that 
no evil birth or insanity may result. 

The second cure is for the insane and is done as follows: 
through confortativa or through sedatives. The cure is not 
possible and cannot expel insanity unless the make-up and 
humors of these persons are changed and redirected, so that 
the new make-up may be stronger and more powerful than the 
old. Then nature feels such assistance that all these die away. 
Confortativa should only be made of quintessence, like quin- 
tessence solis, perlarum, argenti, corallorum, antimonu, vitriol, 
sophie, etc., and the sedatives should be made of the quintes- 
sence of sedatives like mitigatium magnum, anodinum tem- 
peratum, etc. 

By these indicated remedies insane persons can and should 
be completely restored, so that they will not be insane again. 
There is no other way of fighting the cause of insanity, 
although there are still many other things which may be used 
against it, which we shall not name or enumerate. 

In the third place we shall treat Vesani, who by food and 
drink lose their reason and become disturbed, as we say in the 
chapter on the Deprivation of the Senses. These should be 
cured in the following two ways: one in a specific way, the 
other by sedatives. By “specific” we understand that the 
medicine should be of the same substance as the food. The 
medicine should kill the poison of insanity before it has been 
taken. This can be understood in the following way: if a 
person is afflicted with an illness from cat’s brain, the medicine 
should be such that it kills the cat’s brain; there are certain 
herbs which kill cats as soon as they are smelled or eaten by 
them, as they have a specific effect on their brains. Thus, if 
a person is taken ill by cat’s brain, he should be cured by such 
herbs. If someone falls in love through a potion, that love 
should be destroyed in the same way, so that the potion be 
driven out. We shall not continue about specifics, for we do 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 179 


not wish to disclose how people can be contaminated, and there- 
fore we stop writing about remedies against it. The sedative 
cure is achieved by quintessence, which alone has the power 
to remove and soothe. The sedatives are: aurum potabile, 
quintum esse lunae, perle, opiata, etc. It must be taken into 
consideration that, as we have said in De Choreis, it is not 
possible by ordinary prescriptions to find in nature a perfect 
medicine for each individual. Therefore only quintessence takes 
away and expels such vesamitas, and it should be mixed with 
quintessence opu, mandragorae, hyosciami, lolli, etc. The 
quintessence should be of gold and silver, chelidonia, etc., as is 
especially indicated in Quintessentia and in De Gradibus Maiori- 
bus Super Quintessence. Because there is no remedy which can 
remove food or bewitched potions, one should not purge the 
body nor remove the poison in such a way, for it is of no 
avail, as the insanity lies in the spiritus vitae, which cannot be 
affected by any purge. Therefore one should use only con- 
fortativa, so that the spiritus vitae should not be overpowered 
and settle or die. 

The fourth group of insane persons is that of the melan- 
cholict who are disturbed by their own nature—there is no 
apparent defect of reason; their complexes are affected and they 
suppress reason, ruling it as they wish. There are two ques- 
tions to be considered in the cure of melancholy. First, from 
what complex it originated, and second, how it can be expelled. 
They can be understood as follows: if it is melancholy, then 
one should apply contraria. If the melancholic patient is des- 
pondent, make him well again by a gay medicine. If he laughs 
too much, make him well by a sad medicine. There are some 
medicines which make people laugh and make their minds 
happy, removing all diseases which have their origin in sadness. 
This is not incidental, not just laughter in sadness: the entire 
sadness is removed. There are also medicines which induce 
sadness, in such a way that they soothe unseemly laughter and 
exaggerated, unsuitable pleasure by changing it. Thus, the 
reason is set free and the memory is completely normal. In 
this treatment it must be remembered that this medicine can be 


180 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


made from quintessence alone, which has such tempering quali- 
ties that it leads nature back to the right course. The following 
medicines should be known, as they serve against melancholic 
disease and expel all sadness, or free reason from sadness: 
aurum potabile, croci magisterium, arbor maris, ambra acuata, 
letitia veneris. They cause insane patients who show excessive 
pleasure and voluptuousness to be naturally sad. Although there 
are four kinds of melancholy, originating from the four com- 
plexions, there is no need to mention specific medicines for 
each separate complexion, as the two complexions mentioned 
will suffice, for two complexions are alike: sanguis and cholera 
are accompanied by joy, although they are different; for one 
is warlike, the other is not. They have the same cure and it is 
sufficient for both. The other two complexions, phlegm and 
melancholy, behave in the same way; therefore both can be 
cured in the same way. And now enough has been said about 
these melancholic patients. 


FROM THE THIRD CHAPTER OF THE SECOND BOOK 


On the Treatment of St. Vitus’ Dance, or Chorea Lasciva, or 
Recklessness of Mind 


We shall describe what may seem an unusual treatment of 
St. Vitus’ dance, according to its causes. Vitista inherited its 
name from St. Vitus, who is supposed to send such a disease 
to people as an ordeal; it may also be sent by God, because of 
people’s sins. We do not know whether there is some truth in 
this, but one should not think that this disease is a plague 
and that God or the Saint inflicts it. Rather, they impose it, 
or permit that by swearing St. Vitus’ name such an imagination 
may appear, bringing the disease with it. The common people 
consider this a plague, sent by the Saint, but it really is nothing 
but an imaginative sickness, as we have said in the correspond- 
ing chapter, and we have a special cure for such imaginative 
vitista, Accordingly, if it originates from careless spirits and 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 181 


impaired will power, then it is called lascivious disease (chorea 
lasciva) or recklessness of mind (levitas animi), and we pre- 
scribe another special cure for it. Against the third type, chorea 
coeca, which has its origin in nature, we prescribe its natural 
medicine. This practice, therefore, should be understood in 
three ways, since no other cure would help against it, and each 
requires its own cure. 

The first is the cura choreae estuationis, or imaginationis, 
which comes from swearing. There is a difference between the 
type of sickness which comes from rage and that which is due 
to voluptuousness. Therefore, we consider the first, which 
comes from rage and swearing, and divide the treatment into 
parts. It is as follows: the patient should make a likeness of 
himself in wax or resin, and should concentrate on it so that 
all the curses he has uttered may be destroyed in that likeness, 
by his will. He should concentrate his mind and the memory 
of his swearing solely and entirely on that likeness, thinking 
of no other person, and then he should cast it into the fire, 
letting it burn completely so that neither ashes nor smoke shall 
remain. In this way the thoughts pour so strongly and power- 
fully from him into the likeness that they cannot be directed 
against him, as if the image were alive. For curses work 
against those who utter them and not against the men at whom 
they are aimed. There is no resistance in the image, but it is 
physically destroyed and the thoughts are destroyed with it; so 
that this may be well understood, we give the reasons in De 
Imaginatiombus and in Corpus Impressionibus. 

Now we have said enough of the cura vitiste ex ira, and we 
shall begin with chorea lasciva. We know from experience that 
one force expels another. Therefore, we shall give our experi- 
ence here, so that lasciva and imtemperata can be expelled. It 
is done as follows: if a choreic man or woman develops St. 
Vitus’ dance through a voluptuous urge to dance—and this 
happens more frequently to women than to men, since women 
have more imagination and restlessness and are more easily 
conquered by the very strength of their nature—there is noth- 
ing better for expelling this than thoughts and actions against 


182 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


it. Their thoughts are free, lewd and impertinent, full of 
lasciviousness and without fear or respect. These thoughts may 
be expelled in the following way: shut the patients into a 
dark, unpleasant place and let them fast on water and bread for 
some time, without mercy. Thus hunger will compel them to 
adopt a different nature and different thoughts, so that the 
lasciviousness is driven out by abstinence. This is the best way, 
since their immodest actions and blood settle down, the spiritus 
vitae changes and slows down, and the heart becomes sad 
because of the sadness of the place and the changed, imprisoned 
way of living. So the old disease vanishes and sadness becomes 
the master. There is no joy, no laughing, no dancing, no howl- 
ing. When this result has been accomplished, then you should 
begin to mollify the hard life a little day by day, to improve 
the food a little every day, to ease the confinement until melan- 
cholia too has been consumed, so that the patient may come 
back to his senses. This prescription is against the thoughts 
and actions of these people, and it is foolish to give in to such 
dancing and to their will and way of life, with its singing and 
dancing. Such giving in only stimulates and furthers the dis- 
ease. Some think they would die if they could not act in such 
a way (singing, dancing, etc.) but it is not so. It is better to 
take a good stick and give the patients a good beating and lock 
them in as has been described above. It should be noted, 
however, that if they are beaten, such a rage arises within them 
that they may die of it; therefore, one should be careful to 
observe moderation. The best cure, and one which rarely fails, 
is to throw such persons into cold water. 

Now we must speak about the cure for chorea naturalis, 
which comes from nature; we shall show how it takes root 
in the laughing veins and accordingly causes dancing and jump- 
ing. We shall describe the treatment in two ways, according 
to its origin: an internal way and an external way. By external 
way we understand proper localization of the disease. The 
internal medicines from quintessence are these: aurum potabile, 
aqua margaritarum, quintum-mandragore, aqua vitae, anodinum 
summum, quintum papaveris, materia gemmarum, quintum 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 183 


opu, quintum esse lollii, cancrorum, etc. Some of these medi- 
cines should be applied not only externally but internally, as for 
instance summum anodinum, essentia mandragore, essentia 
opu, quintum esse lollu. An ointment should be rubbed into 
these parts. The following has been our practice: take one 
drachm of essentia op, seven grains of essentia mandragore, 
one scruple of essentia lolli, two drachms of papaver, three 
drachms of hyosciamus, one half-ounce of sol potabilis, three 
half-ounces of aqua corallorum. Four drops of this mixture 
should be dispensed in good wine or in water until the end of 
the cure. An ointment made of one half-ounce summi anodini, 
one ounce of olewm muscate, and one drachm olei musci should 
be rubbed into the extremities and particularly into the ticklish 
places, like the armpits, throat, etc. The same treatment should 
be followed for those who are locked up, but not so strictly as 
advised in De Lascivis, so that some sadness may be introduced 
and a change of the body brought about. We shall end this 
chapter, as enough has been said on the cure of chorea. 


FROM THE FOURTH CHAPTER OF THE SECOND BOOK 


On the Suffocation of the Intellect 


In the fourth chapter of the first book we spoke about the 
origin of suffocatio imtellectus. In this fourth chapter we shall 
describe the treatment and cure of suffocatio intellectus et sen- 
suum. We mentioned three kinds of suffocation and shall now 
describe and examine the first of them. It is understood that 
suffocation originates from worms. 

Take an ounce each of colocinthidis, esule, harmell and 
hellebori nigri, three ounces agarici, one half-ounce scam- 
moneae, six ounces each polipodu and sene, mellis despumati, 
vim optimi, three pounds of each, aciti modici adde. Boil 
all these ingredients together and when they have been stewed 
long enough, strain them. Give a large drink of this—de- 
pending on the severity of the illness—to the patient. When 
the use of the laxative has proven effective, give the patient 


184 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


another drink after a short interval and thereafter as often 
as you deem it necessary, for this medicine drives worms 
and their nests away by its quality and by its specifica, and no 
worms can grow in it. Also, if you apply those medicines de- 
scribed in Contra Caducum in the same dose, it takes away all 
paroxysms in old and young persons, and you will never find 
a loss of reason due to worms. There are many other appro- 
priata, specifica, and empirica, which belong to this group and 
serve this purpose, but we omit them since we do not know of 
them from our own experience. We trust those who describe 
these others, and we mention only those which have come to us 
through experience and which ‘have been tried out by us. 

Now we shall describe the cure of the suffocation which 
afflicts women from the womb, as has been mentioned in the 
fourth chapter of the first book. The cure is performed in three 
ways: one by externally applied ointments, the second by fumi- 
gating, and the third by intake. An ointment can soothe the dis- 
ease by its heating power, but it does not completely remove the 
disease. It is an excellent help in the two other methods of cure 
and is prepared in the following way: 

Take olei tapsi ex solis floribus tapsi, olei anethimi ex solo 
viridt anetho ana unciam, olet olivarum et anugdalarum ana 
unciam dimidiam, balsami, masticis, drachmas duas. Mix the 
ingredients together and rub the resulting ointment in around 
the navel and the pit of the stomach; also, put on the belly a 
bag containing previously well-stewed artemisie, camomille, 
beech tree ashes, five handfuls each. If after prescribing this 
medicine you see that the suffocation will not subside, but is 
almost like falling-sickness and looks terrible, then conduct 
fumes from this medicine through a tube to the womb. This 
alone will be sufficient to remove all suffocation of the womb, 
even if the patients have been near death. 

Take verrucarum equinorum genuum unciam unam, assae 
fetidae drachmam unam, cornuum et ungularum capre drach- 
mas duas. Crush them and mix them into a powder, put one 
scruple over a fire and apply it in the usual way. This draws 
suffocation out of the heart, clears the head and brain, cleans 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 185 


the womb and purifies the body more than you can say. Note 
that if you do not notice and feel sufficient relief, an internal 
medicine should be used. For it happens quite often that nature 
is destroyed by the convulsion so that it cannot resist the noxi- 
ous matter without confortativa. And even if the suffocation 
becomes less or subsides, you should still apply those confor- 
tativa. If you cannot obtain them, there are the following 
confortativa matricis which suffice to strengthen nature: 


Confortantia : 


Take a quint each of aurum potabile and materia perlarum, 
half a drachm each of quinta essentia anodim and quinta essentia 
hyosciann, misce simul; dispense one scruple, to be drunk at 
intervals of six hours. 


Confortantia Matricts : 


Materia perlarum, materia corallorum, materia cristallt, 
quinta essentia opi, quinta essentia papaveris, quinta essentia 
hyosciami, et sic de aliis similibus contra colicam. 


It should be borne in mind that if the suffocations are not 
permanent but afflict the patient only at certain times, they 
should be prevented in the manner described in De Preserva- 
tione, which is omitted here. 

We shall also describe the cure of the third kind of suffoca- 
tion, which is as severe as all the others. It has several aspects 
and by this cure we shall cover all kinds that have been de- 
scribed in the chapter on suffocations, for they are cured by a 
similar treatment. No special medicines are necessary for it, 
but only those which have been prepared from quintessence; 
this is so for many reasons, but above all because the diseases 
come from the weakness of human nature; therefore they need 
the medicine which strengthens human nature. By the strength 
of it all suffocations are destroyed. We shall therefore indicate 
those which act against suffocations and have been mentioned 
under quintessentia. They are: 


186 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Fortiora: 


Aurum potabile, appropriatum sanctum, succus perlarum, 
maximum simplex, arcanum vitriolt. 


Mediocnia: 


Salis oleum, aqua aurifera, materia perlarum, oleum lune, 
aqua specifica, materia corallorum. 


Minora: 
Oleum martis, oleum de venere, oleum saturm, oleum mer- 
curu, oleum iovis, oleum christalli, oleam sanctum, quinta essen- 
tia sanguinis, quintum esse coriandri, quintum esse peonie. 


Grandia Repugnantia: 

Quinta essentia opi, quinta essentia mandragore, quinta 
essentia lolli, quinta essentia papaveris, quintum esse gem- 
marum, quintum esse tartar, quintum corallorum, quintum 
sulphuris, quinta essentia anthimoni. 


Now we shall conclude the methods of cure. The treatment 
cannot be improved and is not to be changed, for by its virtue 
not only suffocations but even death can be expelled, as we say 
in De Quintessentia and De Mente et Vita. We shall leave it 
at that and now proceed to other things. 


FROM THE SIXTH CHAPTER OF THE SECOND BOOK 


On Prevention 


Now that we have finished with five chapters, we shall 
speak of prevention. It would be a good thing if there were a 
special remedy for each individual kind of insanity. This, how- 
ever, would take too much time. We shall provide ourselves 
with a prevention that protects man against the first loss of 
senses in epilepsy, and also against mania, chorea, suffocatio 
and privationes sensuum. Such a remedy cannot be produced 
without great skill in separating, for the remedy can and has 
to be brought about solely by quintessences, which by their 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 187 


miraculous strength prevent all these deprivations of reason. 
Not a little virtue and strength are needed to beware of and 
to prevent such grave and overpowering diseases. Therefore, 
we shall mention those quintessences which master privationes 
sensuum. Although such diseases can also be prevented by 
minor medicines, such as simplices and ordinary compounds, 
and by good order and regularity, we shall not describe these 
remedies here, as they do not often help. This is not the case 
with the quintessences, unless the disease is a morbus heredi- 
tarius, as we say in De Sanitate et Aegritudine. There is no 
remedy against this. 

The quintessences are: sol potabile, oleum solis, oleum lune, 
oleum ferri, oleum mercurui, oleum saturm, oleum iovis, oleum 
veneris, oleum vitriol, oleum tartari, oleum anthimoni, quinta 
essentia auri, quinta essentia argenti, quinta essentia ferri, 
quinta essentia mercuri, quinta essentia veneris, essentia sat- 
urm, essentia tovis, soluti coralli, soluti christalli, solute gemme, 
solute perle, essentia melisse, chelidome, carline, florum utrius- 
que helleboris, opium magnum, anodinum summum, essentia 
mandragore, essentia opu, essentia papaveris, essentia lolli, 
essentia hyosciami, aqua vitae aurea, caponis sanguims, elixir 
tincture, tinctura, etc. 

The reason for the strength of these medicines will not be 
given here, but will be stated in the book De Quinta Essentia. 

Now we shall praise God Almighty forever and ever, come to 
a close in the name of the Holy Trinity and end the book De 
Amentibus for the benefit of the common believers and non- 
believers, the evil and good, the poor and rich, so that wrong 
may become right and right remain right. Amen. 


‘ 


FROM “‘ LIBER NATURALIUM ” 


On Vitriol 


Nature brings forth a salt called vitriol. This vitriol is a 
special salt, different from all others, and it has more virtues 
and qualities than other salts and such high and great virtue 


188 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


that it is appropriate to mention it in this book. For vitriol 
offers a complete cure of jaundice, sands and stones, fevers, 
worms and falling-sickness. It is a great deoppilative against 
constipation of the body, and has other virtues too which will 
be discussed in the other chapters. It will be described with 
regard to the two arts, medicine and alchemy. In medicine it is 
a miraculous remedy and in alchemy it is excellent and useful 
for many other things. The art of medicine and alchemy lies 
in the preparation of vitriol, for when it is crude it is not ina 
suitable condition for use but is like a piece of wood from 
which you make many pictures and carvings. Vitriol is excel- 
lent as a medicine for the body; it can also be used for external 
application, for wounds, and for surgical diseases such as 
hereditary scabies, leprosy, ringworm, etc., against which we 
have no other remedies and which cause death. These are 
vigorously attacked by vitriol, which cures them from the root. 
Therefore, the physician should know how to prepare vitriol, 
as it has several virtues in its crude condition, some when it is 
turned into water or chalk, some in the form of green oil. Its 
quality is that it reveals new and special secrets whenever it is 
transformed into another form or essence. It puts all Italian 
and German apothecaries and all their writings to shame, for it 
is a medicine which in itself is sufficient to fill one fourth of all 
dispensaries and is satisfactory against one fourth of all dis- 
eases. Therefore, those ordinarily numerous boxes, containers, 
cases, pitchers, jugs, and glasses are superfluous in the dispen- 
saries, as they contain worthless medicines and can do little 
good and even some harm. The physician should try not to 
depend upon the number of boxes and medicines from far- 
away countries and not to look so far from home. He should 
cast his eyes down like a maiden and then he will find at his 
feet more treasures against all diseases than we could find in 
India, Egypt, Greece, and other foreign countries. For there 
is only deceit in the boxes and cases, and their doctors and 
apothecaries are as wooden as they. Like attracts like. 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 189 


The Kinds of Vitriol 


There are many kinds of vitriol. In each pit there is a 
different kind. The test of whether it turns iron into copper 
is not sufficient. The correct test is whether it can be tried 
against worms, as we shall say later. It is excellent in medi- 
cine, because it drives worms out. In alchemy there is this test 
and not only that of turning iron into copper. But the latter 
is a proof too. Vitriol makes copper out of iron. If it makes 
a great deal quickly and of such a high grade that it is soft 
under the hammer, the better it is for medicine and alchemy, 
for it means there is such a union between iron and the vitriol 
that the vitriol turns iron into good, lasting copper ; the best cop- 
per comes from good vitriol. Nobody should be amazed at hear- 
ing that copper is made of iron by means of vitriol, for another 
of nature’s powers is that of making living mercury out of lead 
by borax water. Also ‘“‘ Kakymies” turn some metals into 
others, just as the vitriol does with iron; for vitriol is not the 
only transmuter of metals, but there are several transmuters 
for each metal. It is the fault of the sophists that we do not 
know all about it and that these arts have gone into the kitchen 
and the money bags. In Hungary there is a brook full of vitriol 
and it is a vitriol that is not coagulated in pebbles. It will 
eat up all iron you put into it, turning it into rust. This rust 
is put into a furnace and then it becomes pure copper, which 
is true copper and remains copper and does not disappear. 
There are countless vitriol ores in Germany, so many that you 
cannot separately describe each kind. In alchemy and medi- 
cine, however, the test has to be made in the above-described 
way and one should act accordingly. There is another proof 
not helpful in medicine but only in alchemy; that the colcotar 
of vitriol makes copper out of it by means of fire. Also, the 
colors of vitriol should be noted. Those that are marked with 
blue and no other colors are not so good as those surrounded 
by red and yellow or covered with it, and that which turns 
white in the air is good for the white and green oil of vitriol; 
the one that turns red or yellow is better for red oil. 


190 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Therefore, we need not say more about the species than that 
the alchemist should act in conformity with the test and every- 
thing it shows if he wants to use it. There is another test which 
is also good: if the vitriol becomes almost black with gallales 
and yields dark black ink, it should be preferred to all others. If it 
gives watery ink and needs many compounds, it is not very 
good. 


On the Virtues of Vitriol in Medicine. On Crude 
Vitriol and Colcotar 


Continuing to report on vitriol and its virtues, I shall have 
to show you above all the virtues of true vitriol and then those 
of its colcotar. We know that vitriol is an excellent purgative 
for serious stomach diseases. It often happens that by food 
and drink the stomach becomes so upset that a long illness 
develops and remains until death. It occurs mostly with those 
who eat and drink irregularly. They fall ill and sometimes 
even die from such ailments. Also, in wartime there is much 
irregularity, etc. Sometimes the illness is followed by con- 
tractions, fever and other disease, and it is obvious that then 
it is best and most advisable to purge with the vitriol which 
has been secretly named grilla. The dose is six comes. This 
is enough if dispensed to a weak patient in wine or water, or, 
to a strong one, in brandy. It tears the disease out by its roots 
from head to heel. The doctor should also bear in mind that 
hellebore, ergot and devil’s root as well as coloquint have a 
quick, strong, purgative effect, but not as much as vitriol. The 
excellence of vitriol is caused by its great bitterness; it con- 
tains an acidity, sharpness, and thorough cleansing power which 
can never be found in hellebore or coloquint. There are two 
methods of purging. The first purges by itself, the second 
by “ salsoditet.” This is a specific form, which makes all the 
worms it touches die; none of the remedies which have been 
mentioned above ever does it. This is a great virtue. There- 
fore, you should know and keep in mind that a purgative which 
contains bitterness and salts not only has a laxative effect but 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 191 


cleanses the body thoroughly. Therefore, it is doubly preferable 
to other purgatives in such diseases. 

About the colcotar, however, you should know that it can 
be applied in surgical cases such as in purulent wounds which 
do not seem to heal. Colcotar is the basis for their healing. 
But, as you know, there are many external surgical diseases: 
high and low, bad, worse, and still worse. Colcotar has no 
power over those which are worse and still worse, but only 
over the first stage. It should be applied only depending on the 
condition of the sore. 

It therefore follows that all sores can be healed by vitriol, 
but always depending on their degree. The vitriol is usually 
made into a good colcotar, which should be soaked in vinegar 
several times, then dried and strained or mixed into a simple 
ointment, depending on what the physician deems necessary. 
A scurf is left which should be removed with fats and then a 
good recovery follows. If a wound resists the healing process, 
then you should know that there is some surplus poison and that 
it must be treated with oils. That is the reason why colcotar 
may be considered insufficient for a complete recovery. If 
crude vitriol is dissolved in vinegar and made into a powder, 
together with the colcotar, and applied in this way, it offers a 
much stronger basis than that of the mere colcotar. The best 
way of producing a colcotar is to take the water out of it and 
to soak the caput mortuum in it until it has absorbed every- 
thing ; then let it dry gently in the air. This when applied yields 
a better result. But always watch the degree of the sore, ring- 
worm or sive1; those which do not respond to treatment must 
be cured with separated oils and water, as we shall describe 
later. You must not despair if the colcotar fails in a cure. You 
should try to improve its distillation, for only by preparation 
can the medicine be brought to its highest degree of effective- 
ness so that it is able to offer resistance to any surgical ailment, 
lupus, cancer, sirei, as we shall indicate when writing on such 
preparations. 


192 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


On the Use of White Vitriol in Physical and Surgical Diseases 


Many great things have been revealed to the physician by 
the art of alchemy, so that excellent cures for all diseases have 
been accomplished. Therefore, even in the beginning of medi- 
cine all physicians devoted themselves to alchemy, because it 
brought such praise and usefulness to medicine. The two arts, 
medicine and alchemy, have again and again emulated each 
other and crossed each other’s path until the drivelling sophists 
and humoralists appeared. At that time poison was poured 
into medicine and medicine became the whore she will be so 
long as there are humoralists. I am telling you this because 
you should pay strict attention to this chapter because of its 
great value. 

One instruction I shall have to give you first of all: when 
ignorant and uncomprehending people intrude into an art, they 
spoil the whole thing and make a manure heap out of a well, 
as has been done with vitriol. At first people seized upon the 
spirit of vitriol and valued it as highly as possible. When that 
had been done, they cured falling-sickness in old and young, 
in men and women, in all kinds of people; but now the ignorant 
chemists have appeared and want to improve it. They dared 
to force vitriol and its virtues into another direction; they let 
the arcanum boil over so that it evanesced; they searched for 
the oil in colcotar when oil has nothing to do with it. For 
everything that is to remove epilepsy should have a sharp, fine, 
penetrating spirit, and then it has the power to penetrate the 
body and to cleanse everything. By such searching the disease 
is found in the place where it is located; no man can know 
where it is, where and how it is located, its center, or the period 
at which it starts. It follows that physicians need more medi- 
cines which penetrate the whole body. Therefore the humoral- 
ists and quacks cure no one and their occupation and actions 
are nothing but humbug. In my opinion the oil which is sought 
by the chemists does not contain a penetrating spirit, but is 
earthly and goes no further than where it falls. Therefore 
wherever such foolishness has spread, stupidity has suppressed 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 193 


the right procedure and put the wrong one in its place. But no 
good has come from this, because it has not benefited the in- 
valids, and therefore the sect of the humoralists is not successful. 

Now let me tell you how the spiritus vitrioli was found for 
the first time. It happened in the following way: after having 
separated the humid spirit from the colcotar, men distilled, 
graded, and circulated it as highly as one can through this 
process. The water thus obtained can be used for various dis- 
eases, both externally and internally, and therefore also in 
falling-sickness. Patients felt signs of recovery. Therefore, 
men took still greater pains with the extraction, taking out the 
very best spiritus vitriol and distilling it from colcotar in the 
hottest fire. The dry and humid spirits were both in it. They 
were extracted gradually. Then both spirits, the humid and the 
dry—which had been in one phial—were graded to a level. 
Then they gave this medicine to patients and found its effects 
even better than the first extract; they had such good results 
that all humoralists were put to shame. A correction was made 
by several masters by the addition of brandy in order to empower 
it still more, but the result was not found to be better. 

I am informing you about the procedure I followed and 
advise every doctor to follow it, especially in falling-sickness, 
which is cured by vitriol. Therefore, we make better and 
higher efforts for the patients; these efforts are required by 
love for one’s fellow-creatures, which a physician should have. 
This is my procedure: the vitriol is imbued with spiritus vini, 
then distilled as I have described above, for the dry and humid 
spiritus. I find that when this has been done, if spiritus tar- 
tart correcti is added in the proportion of one third to the 
vitriol, and also a fifth of spiritum aquae theriacalis camphorate 
to the vitriolic spirits, the result is excellent. This should be 
given to the patient before the attack, or several times a day. 
You should know that there is great power in such medicine 
against this disease, so great indeed that if I had one free wish, 
I could wish for nothing better in nature. 

The first process should remain, just as it was invented 
by the ancients, together with the reported correction; then one 


14 


194 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


can get at the heart and strength of nature. This should be 
taken into account: even religious people will not think that I 
am wrong, if they think of the great suffering caused by this 
miserable disease. It is lying right before their eyes, so that not 
only a human being but even a stone would take pity. As this 
disease is so much more terrible than all the other illness we 
can see, someone should come and say: cursed be all physicians 
who pass by and do not help, like the priest and the Levite 
in Jericho who passed by and left the wounded man lying in 
the road, and only the Samaritan came to his rescue. Judge 
for yourself what great damnation the Levite and the priest 
received for shutting their eyes. The physicians do the same with 
epileptics. Such vitriolic extractions of the arcanum are not only 
good in falling-sickness, but also in its varieties, such as in 
syncope, ecstasy, etc.; also in all constipations and internal 
apostematibus and other similar diseases and in suffocation and 
precipitation of the womb. 

Physicians could find still other virtues in vitriol, apart 
from those I indicate, if they were really zealous. You should 
also know that the prescriptions, in which I have primarily 
described how to prepare the humid spiritus vitriol, cannot be 
written more clearly; a master will understand and they will 
make sense to him. Also, the correction of spiritus vimi will be 
understood by them. You should also look up aqua theriacalis, 
in my Practice in the chapter on the cure of epilepsy, and what- 
ever else that is necessary. You should also bear in mind that 
all the property and strength of vitriol depend on extracting 
the spiritus vitriol and on grading it most carefully; then, 
with its additions, it should be made to penetrate the body so 
that center, root, and germ of the disease may be reached, for 
there is no other way to locate them. 


On the Oil of Red Vitriol 


We also know how the colcotar is turned from vitriol into 
oil by distillation in the retort, as is known to alchemists. The 
vitriol turns red as blood and becomes very acid. This is now 
the oil, which has been sought by chemists; it is better than the 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 195 


spiritus which we have described in the diseases. The pro- 
cedure is very simple; it depends on manipulations, on skill, and 
on good instruments. But you must know its virtues. First of 
all, it is more bitter than anything else. It also has corrosive 
qualities and, therefore, it should be applied skillfully and 
properly; that is, not merely by itself but in a well-dosed mix- 
ture and in harmony with the disease for which it will be used. 
Here is an example: thyrus is a poisonous snake. By itself it 
can do nothing, but in the composition it is excellent; thyriax 
is made of it. In the same way we shall speak here of the oil 
which must not be applied by itself, but only in a uniform 
composition, like the one mentioned with regard to thyriax. 
The acid from thyriax does not do any harm. It is good for 
the stomach in which there is no cholera or apostema; if there 
is cholera or apostema, no good will come from it. The apos- 
tema grows worse through it, swelling because of the acid. 
If there is cholera, however, then there is one force raging 
against the other, like tartar oil and aqua fortis, because neither 
wants to remain with the other. Therefore, good care should 
be taken that this be not overlooked. It is the same with the 
liver. In short, it indeed requires great pains. 

Apart from the instances we have mentioned, its composition 
brings recovery in all kinds of fevers and for the irritated 
stomach, but each sickness requires different treatment and not 
too much. People say there are many virtues in the oil, but I 
have had little experience with it. And I have found by inquiry 
that those who talk about what they can do with it are actually 
telling lies. It is used against sand and tartar, but I have not 
heard of anyone who has been cured by it. It has some effect 
in all cases, but it is not quite perfect. In De Cura Arenae you 
will find a compound of it for use against this and other dis- 
eases. But as I have told you about the composition of the oil, 
I say that this composition, although it may be able to grind the 
stone, to crush and drive out the tartar, does it with such 
clumsiness that another invention will be necessary ; otherwise 
the composition is not acceptable. But I can always acknowl- 
edge what each man knows through his own individual experi- 


196 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


ence. It is a new medicine; therefore it should be tried out 
anew day by day; it should also be mixed with the proper 
compounds. 

But, in connection with surgery, all should pay attention 
to this oil, both those in pain and in great suffering and those 
with good health and without disease, and they should keep in 
mind that this procedure takes scabies away at once, as if one 
were taking off an iron hat and putting it away; the oil 
removes scabies if, on three days in succession, you put it on 
with a feather; then you let it work. If, however, you see that 
this is not sufficient, apply more of it; according to the degree 
of scabies, you may also mollify the compounds by mixing it 
with an infusion of herba chelidonu, and apply it more often. 
But, in summing up, the patient who wishes to recover must 
keep in mind that this cannot be achieved without pain. For 
an invalid it is the same as it is with a pregnant woman who 
cannot give birth to her child without pain. Therefore it must 
be endured, unless it be changed by God. Just as we earn our 
bread in the sweat of our brows, we recover from illness only 
through pain. You should know that all eruptions have been 
cured in this way, and also all scabies, itches and other diseases 
of all kinds that gather on the skin, also lentigines, praue, siret, 
etc. If rubbed in, the compound removes and kills what has 
been there. It also cures lupus and cancer, but great care should 
be taken with these. Where sive: has grown so that it has 
poisoned the sound flesh, so that by and by it will fall off and 
also be eaten up, opodeldoc should be put over it as a protec- 
tive measure. Also, in other corrosive sores and where other 
medicines are of no avail, this one will help because of its 
quality. It is not a bad method of application to mix this oil 
with a thick ointment; it then works more slowly and mildly. 

In short, you can avoid pain as little as can a woman 
who is giving birth to a child. It is still better if the red 
vitriol oil is distilled into a spirit. Then a small quantity will 
be sufficient. Also, in other diseases it works fast and easily, 
corresponding to the speed of the work. This you should know 
about red vitriol oil, as I have learned from experience. In an 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 197 


emergency it is a great and excellent medicine for healing 
dirty diseases like scabies, scrofula, reiidig, schebig and other 
such disgusting, gnawing leprous diseases. There are not many 
medicines acting in that way; therefore the physician should 
consider this oil a firm pillar of the apothecary. Concoctions 
of it are of no avail; they do not remove such sad diseases but 
only rub them in, so that they thrive and will come soon again. 


On White and Green Vitriolic Oil 


It should also be noted that an oil is distilled from red 
vitriol by extraction, sometimes white, sometimes green, which 
is the quality of vitriol. This oil deserves great praise. It 
comes from crude vitriol; therefore it contains also the crude 
spiritus, about which I have written. This oil proves in itself 
that, with its virtues, it is a good oil, to be praised more than 
any others in the treatment of the internal diseases of which I 
have spoken. Now let it be known that this oil, whether green 
or white (but the green oil is better), if it is circulated and 
mixed with the correction, as has been described in the spiritus 
vitriol, will make beyond a doubt a perfect medicine against 
falling-sickness in all its forms. It should also be remembered 
that it is rare for the disease to appear alone; it has subsidiary 
symptoms, as we find in all diseases. It follows that the main 
part is not sufficient in itself; there are also the secrets of 
the subsidiary symptoms which may appear. Therefore, I have 
written in my Practice the chapter on falling-sickness not so 
much with regard to the main disease but in order to make you 
understand the subsidiary diseases. But if there are none, there 
is no reason to do anything against them; it then suffices to act 
in conformity with the principal disease. 

Now we shall direct our attention to the green vitriolic oil. 
You should distill it as carefully as possible in such a way 
that it be separated from glands and impurities by aqua fortis. 
Then it should be taken through fire. Then the spiritus of the 
oil should also be collected and allowed to circulate in itself. 
Then some spiritus vini could be added. If the compound is to 


198 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


be administered solely as a medicine for the principal disease, 
nothing else should be added (if there is no subsidiary disease, 
no medicine should be added). Its dose is ten swallows in 
aqua paeomae, always following the attack. Watch whether the 
attacks come in quick succession and note their intervals. As 
soon as the spiritus olei has found the center of the disease the 
convulsion is weakened and quiet and becomes even quieter. 
When the cure takes effect it makes the patient dizzy but he 
does not feel it. The patients do not fall, or foam, or beat, 
etc. They retain their reason and fall into a light sleep; the 
longer the sleep lasts, the more it leads to soothing recovery. 
At last the dizziness also subsides, yet one should not stop, 
but continue with the application of the medicine, depending 
on the disease of the person. Continue the treatment until the 
recovery is reached. This is the way you should perform the 
treatment, and do everything with great zeal, etc. 


On Vitriol. On Vitriolic Oil to be Used in Alchemy. 
On Crude Oil 


In this chapter I shall first tell you about the crude vitriol, 
so that I may teach you what tricks there are in vitriol. All 
crude vitriol makes copper out of iron. This is a natural 
virtue, not effected by the alchemist but by the vitriol through 
the operations of the alchemist. It seems amazing, in a natural 
light, that a metal should have the quality to disappear and to 
be turned into another. It is as strange as turning a man into 
a woman. But in these things God has given special freedom 
to nature, though not to man. Therefore I declare that on this 
point of transmutation the serene philosopher Aristotle was not 
very sound in his philosophy but rather possessed of foolishness. 
Now I will give you the prescription so that in all parts of the 
German nation you may be able to make copper from iron, that 
is, to turn iron into copper. In putting this into effect we have 
to realize that there may be some other transmutations which, 
however, are not known to us. It is not as difficult to turn iron 
into copper as to make gold out of iron, because God has not 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 199 


revealed the latter. Most things are still hidden from us till 
times to come, when the Saviour will come (for there is a 
saviour for the arts just as there is one in other respects). 

But this transmutation is as follows: take one pound of iron 
chips without any other metal, like copper or tin, add one 
pound of mercury, put it into an iron pan, pour into it one pint 
of vinegar, 4% of vitriol, three ounces of sal ammoniac. Let it 
boil altogether ; stir it well with a wooden stick; if the vinegar 
evaporates, add some more, as well as new vitriol. In this con- 
coction iron boils into copper, and when it has burned into 
copper put the whole into mercury; if you have let it boil for 
ten to twelve hours, then separate the mercury from the iron 
which is still there, and wash it until it becomes clean and pure; 
put mercury into a small fustian or leather bag, press it through 
and you will find an amalgam; wait till it loses its smell and 
you will find good and fine and pure copper. If you take one 
ounce of copper and let it flow into one ounce of silver, it will 
instantly turn into a silver of sixteen grades, and that will be 
the proof that this copper is made of iron. But the grades are 
not fixed; those who know how to work in alchemy will be 
able to make a living out of that; however, it depends on the 
art and on the manipulation, which are unknown to many per- 
sons. Thus you can always make copper out of iron by the 
described process; I am saying that because the transmutation 
from one into the other is possible. It is also of the nature of 
vitriol to become copper after it has been calcinized in its col- 
cotar, with inconsiderable and light liquefaction. For there is 
a queer, copper-like nature in it, and also vitriol will cause a 
strange quality in copper; and if copper is broken by aqua 
fortis and granulated, the entire copper turns into vitriol, and 
can never turn into copper again. Vitriol does not become 
vitriol again after having been turned into copper, unless it be 
turned into it by means of aqua fortis. There is a remarkable 
resemblance between copper and vitriol, because they have such 
a way of reacting to each other. Whatever comes from copper 
gives a good vitriol; as an example, verdigris gives beautiful, 
high-grade vitriol in the spagyric way, and it is certain (although 


200 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


one should not mention it, and there is much mockery about 
it) that there is an excellent tincture hidden in vitriol, which 
can do more than many people know. Hail to him who under- 
stands it. 

Now mark my words on the oil from vitriol. If oil argenti 
vivi and that vitriol are put together and if they coagulate 
according to their process, it gives a sapphire of a strange kind, 
not the sapphire stone, but one with a wonderful tincture and 
strange ways, of which one cannot talk. Therefore, I say that 
there is great secrecy in nature, as well as in other things, 
as in God’s creatures; and at this very hour it would 
be better if one studied such things rather than running after 
evil things, etc. But this is a time which highly appreciates 
whoring, and that practice will go on until one third of the 
world is destroyed and one third dies by cheating. The last 
third will hardly survive. Afterwards, it will be put right again, 
but at present it cannot be. There will be a golden world. Man 
will come to his senses and live in a human way and not like 
an animal, not in taverns. 

Although I have written so much about vitriol, it is neces- 
sary to see the miserable invalids in their falling-sickness, 
that every physician in his own conscience may think of God 
our Creator, that he may love his neighbors, and that he may 
not despise, refuse, or reject God’s gifts which are in vitriol. 
For love’s sake he would work at them day and night, so that 
nobody could be found who was lazy, etc. Then you will be so 
highly endowed by God, that you will be lacking in nothing 
toward invalids, and you will be granted everything. 


Process and Ways of Vitriolic Oil by which Four Diseases Can 
Be Cured: Epilepsy, Hydropsy, Pustulae and Gout 


Prepared in such a way as to Prevent the Errors commutted by 
Philosophers, Artists, and Physicians. 


The spiritus is drawn out of the mineral vitrioli by the col- 
cotar, which is false and really nothing, unless it be called 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 201 


phlegm, which is the noblest spirit, and to which every power 
is attributed. Although the oil from colcotar is of great effec- 
tiveness in harena and lithiasis and in alopecia and other dis- 
eases, it is of no avail in the four diseases in the above title. 
Hippocrates, with whom all the others agree, indicates the 
number of years, duration, symptoms, etc. and says the epilepsy 
is incurable for the same number of years as gout. But as these 
-had no experience with the spiritus vitrioli, this tract may be 
committed to the vultures. First, the spiritus should be ex- 
tracted from vitriol over a big fire in a stirred cucurbith until 
it has reached the ninth alembic and on the hottest fire it should 
be driven through the reverberator in the athanor day and night 
until the fourth day. In this way, the spiritus vitriol: is prepared. 

Then, on the third day, the colcotar must be distilled in a 
horizontally-placed phial, in the athanor, on the hottest wood 
and coal fire until one pound of colcotar yields one and a half 
pounds, colored like scarlet in the receptor. Then alcali should 
be drawn from the retort, dissolved a fourth and a fifth time, 
and finally it should coagulate. Thus the three things con- 
tained in vitriol are extracted and separated. 


Procedure: 


With epilepsy the following procedure should be taken: after 
each convulsion one scruple should be administered to the 
patient in a good wine. The following dose of oil from the 
colcotar should be given morning and night: four grains in 
aqua de paeoma. This procedure should be followed to the 
fifth attack. In cases where the attacks do not come in quick 
succession, half the dose should be given for thirty days. 

In cases of gout the above-mentioned dose should be taken 
for thiry days; but continue to rub the spiritus vitrioli into the 
place where the pain is located until the gout has disappeared. 
If, however, it is an old gout, one quarter of liquor de mummia 
should be added to the vitriolic spirit and used as an ointment 
for the gouty limbs. 

In cases of hydropsy half a scruple of spiritus vitrioli in 
liquore de serapini should be given in three to four doses a day. 


202 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


according to the disease. If liquor serapini cannot be obtained, 
liquor tartar crudi should be taken instead. 

The following procedure should be followed with pustulae: 
for nine days spiritus vitrioli should be rubbed into the entire 
skin. Open sores should be treated by applying oleum de colco- 
tar with an alkaline mixture, as is the surgeon’s custom. But 
the bandages must not be changed for six days. Prescriptions 
and diet should be kept according to the patient’s disposition, 
for the right cure is in medicine only, and not in the food. 
Therefore, the medicine should be given most assiduously, in 
order to cure thoroughly the above-mentioned diseases. 


Against Sand, Mucus, Grains of Sand and Stones in the 
Bladder : 


Take ten pounds of red colcotar, fourteen half-ounces of 
alcohol vini, put into a vertically or horizontally resting phial 
and distill for four days; the fire drives a fine red oil into the 
receptacle. Put just one drop of it into good wine, mornings 
and evenings. 


An Excellent Arcanum Against Falling?Sickness : 


Take fifteen pounds of Roman or Hungarian vitriol (which 
unlike the others do not turn into copper) a half-ounce each 
liquoris peonie, camphore, rasure eburis, spodu, distill through 
the retort. Take three pounds of distilled liquor, half a pound 
each alcoholis vini correcti, aquarum melisse and valeriane, 
one pound of colcotar; let it go through the retort and then 
take one pound of this liquor, two pounds of fresh colcotar; 
distill for twenty-four hours through a horizontally-placed phial. 
Then you will have oleum liquorem and phlegm together; 
rectify it, then distill its phlegm in aqua fortis. When that has 
been done, extract the liquor from the sand. At last, when you 
put the compound into the open fire, the red oil appears. Dosis 
phlegmatis always weighs one quint and should be given against 
the paroxysm. Dosis liquoris is one scruple, dosis olei three 
grains. If this disease has lasted from twenty to forty years, 
you should administer the liquor. The oil should be given 
those who have been afflicted for fifty years or more. 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 203 


Other Procedures Against Falling-Sickness : 

Take one pound of Roman or Hungarian vitriol; distill its 
phlegm ; put it again into its own colcotar, according to the art; 
extract it again; repeat this in the fourth degree of the fire. 
The dose of this medicine is from half a scruple to one third 
of a drachm, before and after the attack. When the attack has 
subsided the patients sleep. You should give it while it is still 
hot. It should be applied before the attack, while it still boils and 
can stimulate and stir. 


Preparation of Vitriol Against Suffocation of the Womb: 

Take four half-ounces of vitriol that has been cleared of 
phlegm and colcotar, six half-ounces of hertzpoley, one half- 
ounce of alcohol vimi, reduce this compound by distillation; give 
the same dose as in falling-sickness. 


Preparation of Vitriol Against Siphita stricta and Gutta: 


Take one half-ounce of the above-described rectified vitriol, 
four half-ounces of alcohol vini, one half-ounce of alumen jament 
(which should be chalk white and of a sweetish taste mixed 
with acid); reduce the compound through the fourth grade 
of the fire in liquor. A dose of six to ten grains of this has to 
be taken. Apply one half-scruple externally in the spot where 
the disease takes its root and about which the patient is com- 
plaining, that is, super locum symptomatis. Symptoms of this 
disease are in pulsu oculorum, coll, pulsu ambarum manuum. 
Note that those suffering from syphita stricta walk in their 
sleep at night. Tie the medicine over the pulse of their eyes, 
and if this does not help blindfold the patients with it and cover 
the pulse of their neck with it, but do not beat them as has been 
taught by Avicenna. 


In Drops or Guttae: 

Spread this liquor over the tip of the tongue and keep it 
wet ; if the patient’s mouth is shut as in paralysis, open it with 
an instrument, and put the liquor on his tongue so that it 


204 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


remains wet, because this is the seat of the symptoms and of 
the disease. 


Addition Against Epilepsy and All Kinds of Falling-Sickness : 

Take one drachm of prepared vitriol; liquoris fisci quercini 
and orizontis, fourteen grains of each; fiat mixtura. The seat of 
falling-sickness is in the region of the nucha. Apply it at the 
nucha up to the diameter of a penny. 


Addition Against Suffocation of the Womb: 


Take seven grains of this liquor of vitriol, one drachm gra- 
norum actis, alcohol vini ad pondus omnium, reduc in composi- 
tionem, locus suffocationis matricis est in umbilico; therefore 
apply it over the navel. If, however, the suffocation appears 
with vomiting and choking, the medicine should be applied 
downward. 


On Sulphur or Earth Resin 


There are so many secret things in sulphur that not enough 
can be said about it. If it is separated from its arcanum and 
the dirt is washed off, it becomes whiter than snow. 

Sulphur embrionatum from gold is excellent for the heart, 
that of silver excellent for the brain, from copper for the kid- 
neys, from lead for the spleen, from iron for the gall-bladder, 
from tin for the liver, from argentum vivum for the lungs. 
But all of these are for one disease; that is, suffocation of the 
limbs remaining after apoplectic fits, which it is able to sup- 
press and choke. These virtues will be followed by those of 
sulphur mineralis, for they are the same in all works, but they 
have to be applied with greater strength and more carefully 
internally and externally. Sapphire has the power of removing 
anthraces and their scurfs, more than all corrosives ; its sulphur 
is of the same kind, for if it is extracted from the corpus 
generatum in the vulcanic preparation, it acts like a plastercast. 
It does that not only in anthrax, but also if applied in cancer, 
and in persico igne. It starts with an apostema. There you can 
see the effects of separation, graduation, and correction. As 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 205 


to the embrionatic sulphurs in cachimuis alchamiis opio, in mag- 
nets, antimonio and talc, you should know that if they are 
extracted from bodies and living things, they give extremely 
fine sulphur. This property and effect depend on its grade in 
the operation. First they take their origin as to their virtues, 
even if they have already been spoiled by the preparation. 
Secondly, they are best for phlegmaticis, especially for phtysicis, 
peripneumonicis, etc., and in every kind of cough. What nature 
can possibly achieve is done by that sulphur and put right again. 

Now you know about sulphur and, similar to it, the spiritus 
vitrioli, as for instance the salts which produce a marvelous 
sulphur, in which the corpora amimata are separated from 
the corpora embrionata; that is, salt, sal gemmae, species 
aluminis, vitriol. I shall, however, give you a short general 
rule that all sulphurs from vitriols and salts are stupefacientia, 
narcotica, anodina, somnifera, but of such quality that the 
somniferous effect is brought about in a mild and easy way and 
removed again without any bad effects. There is no opiatic 
effect as in hyosciamo, papavere, mandragora, but it works 
mildly and well, without any infection. I have personally pre- 
pared and corrected such sommniferum and stupefactivum with 
such excellent results. And as we, the physicians, know that the 
somnifera do many excellent things, and that the opiata con- 
tain such poison that they cannot be applied without quintes- 
sence, we should all the more rely on and trust in these somm- 
fera, because we know of many diseases which cannot be cured 
without anodines. God has given us a cure for them through 
the nature of the anodine. 

As for sulphur, you should know that of all kinds that of 
vitriol is most widely known; it is firm. Besides, it is so sweet 
that chickens eat it and then fall asleep, but wake up again 
after some time without any bad effect. You should know that 
this sulphur can cure any illness which is to be cured by 
anodines, without any bad after effects. It extinguishes pain 
and soothes the heat and painful diseases. It is a medicine 
preferable in every respect ; the cure afterwards is confortativum 
quinte essentia. What can you physicians do? These two medi- 


206 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


cines are better than all those of Apollo, Machaon, and Hippo- 
crates. Remember, you physicians, that this sulphur is sulphur 
philosophorum, because all philosophers have tried to have a 
long life and good health and to resist illness. This they found 
in this sulphur; therefore, according to their request, it was 
called sulphur philosophorum and you should know how to 
grade, separate, and refine it. 

There is still another kind of sulphur embrionatum, which is 
in wood, and above all, fire itself is sulphur which cannot be 
kept in one’s life but perishes and dies with the wood. There 
is sulphur in all things made of wood or in anything which 
burns into ashes. Such sulphur is vegetabile, not steady, not 
to be used for anything but those things which should be pre- 
pared with fire. You should know, however, that such sulphur 
indicates the nature of other sulphurs; like fire which devours 
everything, each sulphur is an invisible fire which devours dis- 
eases, and as the fire does not consume the wood visibly, each 
sulphur does it invisibly. Therefore, olewm ignis is a great 
arcanum in all diseases. And sulphur is oleum igmis; if you 
wish it to have the effect of a medicine, it must be brought to 
its volatility so that it disappears like the flames; it must become 
subtle and leave its body; its body must separate from what 
is not elementum ignis. If sulphur is made subtle and volatile, 
then it consumes what should not exist, what is not safe by 
nature. Diseases for instance are not steady, but the body is 
in opposition to all elements. The olewm ignis is only opposed to 
things in the body which are not safe; that is, diseases, etc. 
Therefore, we distinguish two kinds of sulphur embrionatum, 
one which is steady, the other which is pure fire. One is a living 
fire, the other is an insensible fire. But both the sensible and 
the insensible serve for consumption, one in wood, the other 
in diseases. 


On Mineral Sulphur 
Sulphur mineral should not be used in its crude state, 


but separated from the impurities. Then it becomes an ex- 
cellent medicine. If it is elevated from aloepaticus and myrrha 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 207 


two to three times, it becomes such a preservative against 
plague, pleurisy, and all ulcers and constipations of the body 
that, if taken in the morning, no disease can enter the body 
that same day, such as plague, pleurisy, and others. This is 
especially true if it is taken in the following prescription: take 
ten ounces of well-prepared sulphur (as described), one and 
a half drachms myrrhae rubae, one ounce of aloehepatici. one 
half-ounce croci orientalis; mix them and prepare powders 
from the compound. 

If elevated from the vitriol several times—the more the 
better—it inflames essentia and spiritus vitrioli in it, and is a 
preservative against all fevers and a cure for old and new 
coughs, more than could be disclosed or written in a book. It 
also is a preservative against falling-sickness during the patient’s 
youth. If taken daily, it will conserve health and protect 
people so that no harm can afflict them. In trade it corrects 
wine, so that all wines can be kept fresh and in good condition 
through it, and wine can be made a healthy drink for man. 
But it must not be taken in its crude state. If it is in wine, 
nothing impure can remain in the wine. All wines prepared in 
this way are of the kind that do not produce sand and tartar, 
nor do they provoke apoplexy or grave apoplectic fits, coughs, 
and so on, nor putrefaction; for as we have said, its arcanum 
is of such quality, when prepared as has been described, that 
nothing can be found to equal it. Therefore, watch mineral sul- 
phur; it should not be prepared only once, but often and 
repeatedly, so that it loses all its impurities, poison and what 
should not be in it; only that which contains the best medicine 
should remain. The right kind of sulphur has the quality of 
making red things white by its fume, as for instance red roses. 

We also know that it turns white if refined and applied 
in medicine as described; but it must be applied externally. It 
should be known that there are many colored sulphurs: yellow, 
dark yellow, red, redder, brown, black, white, green. But all 
these colors are of no use, except the yellow one; the more 
yellow, more gold the color is, the better for health. The others 
contain much of arsenicum realgaris and similar things; there- 


208 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


fore they should be avoided in medicine. But in alchemy these 
others are better because of the “ impression” which they have 
received from such “ realgaric ” spirits. 

Sulphur also removes external ringworm of the body, and 
for this the less colored sulphurs are better than the yellow-red 
ones, because of the subtlety of the arsenic spirits. If such 
sulphurs are sublimated from vitriol, sale nitro, sale gemme, or 
alumine plumoso for several times, then they are so fine that 
they remove ringworm and serpiginem from the base and with 
the root. It is a great help in removing externally what has 
originated internally, bringing it out from inside and healing 
it. There are magnetic powers and ways which cannot be suffi- 
ciently explained, except by the great experience of the “ vul- 
canic art,” for thanks to it there are great and wonderful 
miracles in nature and its powers. Therefore, remember that 
sulphur has such a nature and quality that it gives man excel- 
lent health, if it has been graded; this is true not only if it is 
swallowed, but also its smoke preserves and conserves if 
Meisterwurzen, Krammetwein, and rosmarine are added. 


On the Use of Metallic Sulphurs 


The sulphurs which are made out of whole metal, the primary 
sulphurs, are separated by alchemic means in the ways I have 
described with regard to sulphur. The same are also in these 
six metallic sulphurs. They possess even more physical prop- 
erties and special qualities, because they have turned into metal. 
The properties of the metal are to found in the sulphur. There- 
fore it follows that these are much better and more noble than 
other sulphurs. The physician should know that virtues con- 
tained in sulphur are contained in this one especially, and 
graded to the highest. Therefore, the sulphur coming from gold 
has gold-like virtues, that from silver silver-like virtues; that 
from iron has the nature of iron, and does what iron does. 
What is. done by topaz and crocus martis is also done by the 
sulphur which comes from iron. It is the same with copper, 
saturno, and other metals, and the physicians should do their 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON 209 


best to have such sulphur, for though the dose be small, the 
effect is great so that even lepers recover. 


On the Alchemistic Virtues of Sulphur 
First, On the Embrionic Sulphur 


The extraction of embrionic sulphur is sometimes performed 
by sublimation, sometimes per descensum, if it is well-disposed 
sulphur and not much mixed with other bodies. Sometimes, 
however, if it is very subtle, it cannot be sublimated by simple 
distillation, but only by aquae fortes. It may be extracted 
from the other bodies into the aquae fortes and afterwards it 
coagulates. There are several kinds of aquae fortes, and they 
do not take away or change anything in the shape of the sulphur 
or in its power, if they are extracted in the right way, accord- 
ing to their properties. Afterwards it becomes fixed, if it con- 
tains gold; usually gold is found by sublimation. It also fixes 
all volatile sorts of gold and holds them, which cannot other- 
wise be done. It is not noticeable during the separation because 
of its subtlety and its subtle “corporality” (corporalitet). 
Many procedures have been started with such sulphurs, such 
as making tinctures from them, but the formula could not be 
found, for there is not enough in sulphur in which to hide a 
tincture. Therefore, such searching is in vain, unless it con- 
tains gold; otherwise one should not look for silver in sulphur ; 
none of them contains silver. In one there is more gold than in 
the others, as for instance in red talc, marcasite and goldsand, 
Those are rarely without gold. But those who want to attempt 
it, should remember that the sulphur must be separated from 
the gold in such a subtle way that the gold does not evaporate. 
I could help many now with a few words, but I prefer to keep 
silent. 


On Mineral Sulphur 


Now I must write about the miracles of the qualities of 
sulphur in alchemy. Many have tried various arts, trying to 
make something from sulphur which would be more than sul- 


15 


210 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


phur itself. But God has created art in such a way that it can 
do it. As the power of art can do it, the master has followed 
that art and tried to find out what can be made of sulphur which 
is not in sulphur or has tried to find out if it might lead to 
something else. It is like a woman who in herself cannot bring 
forth children, but who, together with her husband, does. If 
art can bear a little more and if they do something together, 
then the artist is the man and father who causes all. Now 
art has found a prescription for spiritus transmutationis, to 
make a liver or lung from linseed oil or sulphur. Such a liver 
and lung have been frequently distilled. While working at it, 
it was found that such a liver gives milk which does not differ 
from ordinary milk. It is fat and thick; also such a liver gives 
red oil like blood, so that milk and blood were distilled together. 
Neither colored nor falsified the other, but each separated from 
the other without doing any harm—the white as a sediment, 
the red on the surface. 

Now the art went on searching, trying to make silver from 
the white and gold from the red. I know that nothing has ever 
been made from the crude or milk sulphur, either by the an- 
cients or by the moderns. Therefore, I say that this is a dead 
milk with nothing in it. But mark what I say about the red 
oil which is yielded from this liver. Each well-polished crystal 
or pearl which is put into it for some time—for three years— 
becomes a hyacinth, that is, like a hyacinth in all its character 
and looks. Likewise a ruby which is not highly graded and which 
is put into the red oil for nine years becomes so pure and clear 
and reaches such a grade that, if later it is put into darkness, it 
gives light like a coal, so that you can see from all around where 
it is lying. This has been proved by experience. The old 
alchemists made carbuncle out of it; if they put a good hyacinth 
into the oil, it was to become a burning carbuncle. It is 
a matter of experience that such color is not only in the one 
I have described. For it also turns sapphire light blue with 
green in it, and it colors other precious stones. But it colors 
no other things, not even glass. It grades the precious stones 
so highly that they reach the highest quality, higher than nature 


DISEASES THAT DEPRIVE MAN OF HIS REASON PA 


itself can grade them. Such gradation of precious stones has 
never been described or used before; it is only possible with 
those colored and tinted by the red blood in sulphur. 

It should also be known that every kind of silver put into 
it and left to lie there for a time turns black and gives a chalk 
sediment, not steady and fixed, but unsteady and volatile. If 
it has been there all its term, and the end comes, it does all that 
can be done; it is of no use to speak more of it. Remember 
that sulphur if brought to the right grades becomes more 
subtle, finer, stronger, quicker in its effect, and better. This is 
the effect of the tincture on stones and metals. Those who 
want to make it should not just believe that they know it, but 
should really know it, for its preparation is the most dangerous 
work in alchemy. It must be thoroughly tried and frequently 
used, and must be known not only by hearsay but by one’s own 
knowledge and experiment. This is twice as good. I cannot say 
anything about its virtues, and whether they are graded or not. 
I can only speak about color and tincture which, as I have said, 
are of the highest. But mind that this will not happen in the 
virtues and their powers, for there are no tinctura virtutis, but 
only coloris. 


On the Sulphur of Metals to be Used in Alchemy 


I have spoken several times in this chapter about the oil 
of sulphur, which is made from metals by destroying them. 
I also indicated what properties they have for medicine, that 
tinctures can be made from them, and that one can be tinctured 
into the other; but I was not able to go into this deeply. I 
need not give the motive for it here. But it is really true that 
those who have sulphur auri are able to grade gold with it above 
the normal degrees, that is, above 24 and up to 36 degrees and 
more, so that the gold color could not come higher or be more 
permanent in antimonio or quarrierung. 

It is further true that sulphur lunae grades silver so highly 
in its whiteness that on a needle equal quantities of silver and 
copper cannot be distinguished; all is pure, fine, clean silver. 


212 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


You should also know that sulphur from copper can stand the 
thunderbolt, but does not become graded, and its color mixed 
with sulphur of iron becomes the best steel; with sulphur iovis 
you obtain the best of all tins, which can even resist the thunder- 
bolt; by means of sulphur saturmi lead becomes firm, so that 
it yields no white lead, yellow lead, minium, nor crystal glass, 
nor any spiritus. The sulphur from argentum vivum makes it 
possible to work at argentum vivum with the hammer; it can be 
treated with red-hot, iron-like copper, but it cannot bear the 
cineritium, 

So much for metallic sulphurs; also, if you cast sulphur 
auri into silver it colors it, but fixes nothing. In this way you 
can transform sulphur into another substance than itself; but 
not into what you would like. This is what you should know of 
sulphur: its kinds, its nature, qualities and character. For 
handling sulphur a good chemist, a perfect artist, an experienced 
master, a thorough experimentalist is necessary. 


IV 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, AND 
SALAMANDERS, AND ON THE 
OTHER SPIRITS 


BY 
THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 
CALLED PARACELSUS 


TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN, WITH AN INTRODUCTION 


BY 
HENRY E. SIGERIST 





INTRODUCTION 


We do not know exactly at what time Paracelsus wrote his 
treatise On Nymphs, Sylphs, Pygmies and Salamanders. It 
must have been in his later years when he wrote other philo- 
sophical and theological books, and Sudhoff published it in the 
last volume of his edition* together with such treatises as De 
sagis et earum operibus, Liber de lunaticis, De generatione 
stultorum and others. 

It is a very unpretentious treatise, compared with such books 
as the Philosophia sagax. At times it is written in a style that 
reminds us of fairy tales. And yet it gives an excellent picture 
of Paracelsus’ philosophical and theological views. 

Paracelsus was a man of the Renaissance and a rebel, not 
only in medical matters. His intense individualism made it 
impossible for him to accept the integral dogmas of the Catholic 
Church and its scholastic philosophy, just as he was unable 
to follow the doctrines of the Reformation. He disliked the 
spectacular cult of the Church and had a deeply felt longing 
for the simplicity of the early Christian community. The Bible 
was the starting point of his thought. 

God is almighty. In the beginning he created the heaven and 
the earth and all that is in it. He made man from the dust of 
the ground, from limus terrae, and made him in his own image. 
Limus terrae, according to Paracelsus, was an abstract from 
heaven and earth, the quintessence of the four elements and the 
firmament; and since man was made from it he is a microcosm, 
reflecting the macrocosm and intimately connected with it. 
Heaven and earth, the firmament and the four elements, con- 
stitute the world, and also man. Man, therefore, has a dual 
body, an elemental and a sidereal one. The elemental body, the 
earthly part of man has material needs. It craves food and 
drives man to reproduce himself, while the sidereal body, the 
heavenly part has appetites of another kind. It drives man to 


1Vol. XIV, pp. 115-151. In the edition of Huser, the text is found in vol. 
IX, pp. 45-78. 
ZS 


216 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


seek wisdom and satisfaction in the cultivation of the arts and 
sciences. This duality explains many tensions and conflicts. 
Man, however, was created in the image of God. God gave him 
a soul. That made him a moral being that seeks salvation in 
God. These three parts, these three bodies of man are one, an 
indivisible whole, as long as he is alive, but they separate in 
death, each returning to its origin.’ 

The destiny of man is to walk in the light of nature and in the 
eternal light. “ The beginning of theology is the enlightenment 
of man. He must be enlightened in all things of nature and must 
know them.” * If he does this, he will understand Christ, and 
the Holy Scriptures will not be dead letters to him. Theology, 
therefore, requires philosophy which, to Paracelsus, is nothing 
else but the exploration of nature. Philosophy and science are 
identical to him. God has created the world and reveals himself 
in his work. Nature can be explored and can be interpreted. 
God made it thus that the human mind can perceive its light. 
“Nature emits a light by which it may be perceived from 
its own radiance.” * And through the light of nature man 
gets access to the eternal light, to God’s own world. 

The investigation and interpretation of nature thus becomes 
the subject of philosophy and the door to theology. The inter- 
pretation of nature, however, is not easy and sometimes pre- 
sents great difficulties. There are strange things in nature 
that seem incredible and about which nothing can be found in 
the Holy Scriptures. But God is almighty and can create what- 
ever he pleases, strange as it may appear to man. And the pur- 
pose of the Holy Scriptures was not to describe and explain every 
object of nature; they deal with God and the soul in their 
interrelationship. 

Such strange creatures are the mysterious beings—Para- 
celsus usually calls them ding, things—that inhabit the four 


2See B. S. von Waltershausen, Paracelsus am Eingang der deutschen 
Bildungsgeschichte, Leipzig, 1936, a book that gives by far the best inter- 
pretation of Paracelsus’ philosophy and theology. 

5 See p. 247. 

4 See p. 223. 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 214 


elements, the nymphs, sylphs, pygmies and salamanders and, 
related to them, the sirens, giants and dwarfs. 

To the mind of primitive man, living in constant intercourse 
with a still hostile nature, every object of his environment 
seemed animate. The rock, the tree, the pond, all were in- 
habited by spirits from whom good or evil might come, who 
forced one to be on his guard constantly and who had to be 
placated at times. The creative genius of the Greeks lent color 
to these vague spirits. The heaven became Zeus, the sun Apollo, 
the moon Artemis, not mere forces of nature, but beings with a 
biography, with passions and whims very similar to those of 
mortal man, and thus very close to him. And, in his immediate 
surroundings, springs and brooks were populated with lovely 
creatures, the nymphs, some of whom, like Calypso, achieved 
great fame. Dryads spoke from the trees, and on hot summer 
afternoons Pan’s pipe was heard in the woods. Sirens half 
woman, half bird, lured the traveller on distant seas and there 
were tales of far-away regions inhabited by one-eyed giants, 
the Cyclops. In: the vicinity of mountains Vulcan’s and his 
assistants’ blows could be heard as they rocked the earth with 
their hammers. From Homer to Ovid and later the doings of 
these deities were pictured in endless numbers of songs. They 
were real to the naive man and presented to him a humanized 
picture of a nature that he could understand and with which 
he could deal. We still feel sentimentally attached to this color- 
ful world of Greek mythology and it still lives in our language. 
We speak of venereal diseases, of nymphomania. We vulcanize 
rubber, use salamanders in the kitchen, call small races pygmies 
and know sylph-like creatures. 

Christianity had a difficult task in overcoming the ancient 
gods. Its monotheism was too austere for the common man, 
and soon the Christian heaven was populated with angels and 
saints, many of whom had taken over the functions and attri- 
butes of ancient gods. Venus took abode in the Harz mountain 
and continued to seduce men, promising them the joys of love 
and eternal youth. And when she could not act so openly, she 
was satisfied in being worshipped under the features of Saint 


218 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Veronica. Her bird, the dove, became the Holy Ghost from 
whom Mary conceived without sin. 

Christianity succeeded in dethroning the major gods of 
paganism or in filling their place with its own saints, but it 
had no substitute to offer for the elemental spirits, for all those 
minor deities and demons that were so close to man in his 
everyday life. There had to be an explanation for good luck 
and bad luck. Omina would explain a great deal and the 
belief in signs persisted to our days. But if you dropped a 
piece of buttered bread, why was it that it usually fell to the 
ground with the buttered side down? Was it not logical to 
assume that this was a practical joke of some goblin? 

And so, the ancient spirits of nature survived the twilight of 
paganism. Greek demons joined the legions of spirits of the 
Germanic and the particularly rich Celtic mythology. As here- 
tofore, man was surrounded by a world of strange beings whose 
dealings with men were recorded in hundreds of fairy tales. 

The Church could not deny their existence; they were too 
deeply rooted in popular belief. But the theologians—not the 
true theologians, as Paracelsus said—declared them to be devils 
that had to be fought. Paracelsus had totally different views. 
He too believed firmly in the existence of such beings and 
considered them important enough to devote a special treatise 
to them. He never says that he had seen them. Like angels they 
appeared only rarely to man. But on his peregrinations he 
heard a great deal about them. In the mountains he saw strange 
excavations which local traditions attributed to the activity of 
pygmies. And in certain regions, at night, he probably saw 
flickering lights running around over the ground playfully, 
will-o’-the-wisps, and people said they were the spirits of fire. 

Paracelsus was particularly interested in the elemental spirits. 
Four elements constitute the material world: water, air, earth, 
and fire; and each element is inhabited by a kind of being 
peculiar to it and to whom the element is his chaos. Man lives 
between heaven and earth. Between heaven and earth there 
is air. Man, therefore, lives in air, and air is his chaos. Thus 
water is chaos to the nymphs, earth to the pygmies, fire to the 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 219 


salamanders, while the sylphs have the same chaos as man. 
They are at home in their chaos and, therefore, nymphs do not 
drown in water, pygmies are not choked in earth and sala- 
manders do not burn in fire. This seems incredible but God 
is almighty. Why should he not be able to create such beings? 

They are not devils but creatures of God and like other 
creatures they are testimonies of God’s miraculous works. They 
are not spirits and it is a mistake to call them elemental spirits, 
for they have bodies that resemble that of man. They have two 
of man’s bodies, the elemental and the sidereal ones. This 
explains why they too eat food and feel the urge to reproduce 
themselves. And it also explains why they are skillful in the 
arts and crafts. And since they have these two bodies they are, 
like man, subject to the diseases that arise from the elements 
and from the heaven. But they lack one of man’s three bodies, 
and this makes them beings of their own. They have not the 
soul. In that they are like animals. They look like men but 
are not descendants of Adam. They live in:social groups, obey- 
ing laws, bear children but when they die, there is nothing left. 

Since every creature that is denied salvation craves it, they 
seek union with man. When a nymph marries a man from 
Adam, through the sacrament of matrimony she receives the 
soul. And her children have the soul. She becomes a moral, 
responsible being who will have to render accounts on the Day 
of Judgment. Tradition reports of many such nymphs who 
married man, lived with them and were faithful to them. 

Since they are not devils but beings that may be saved, 
they must be treated kindly, and contracts and agreements with 
them are binding for man too. Paracelsus sides passionately 
with the nymph who married a nobleman, von Staufenberg, 
and was repudiated by him because he took her for a devil. 
He married another wife but the nymph came back and killed 
him on the day of his wedding. Paracelsus finds that she was 
justified in doing it, since no judge would have given her her 
rights as she was not from Adam, and so God put the law into 
her hands and allowed her to punish the adulterer.° 


® See p. 245. 


220 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


For what purpose did God create such strange beings? As 
was mentioned before, they are testimonies of the grandeur 
of God’s works. This they share with the whole of nature, but 
God created them for a special purpose—and here Paracelsus 
is writing as a theologian and scientist. God created these ele- 
mental beings as makers and guardians of the treasures of the 
earth. There is an infinite wealth of minerals in the earth. 
They are made in the depths of mountains under the influence 
of fire, and this is where the salamanders come in. Once the 
mineral ores are made they are guarded, those in the earth by 
the pygmies, those on the surface by the sylphs, and those at the 
bottom of the waters by the nymphs. Why should they be 
guarded? Has God not permitted these treasures to be made for 
man? Yes, but they should not be discovered all at once. God 
decides when the time has come for a deposit to be found and 
exploited. Then the pygmies, or whoever the guardians are, 
retire and the place is open to man. 

Paracelsus, who on his wanderings visited many mines and 
worked in them, must have heard folk-tales that inspired him 
to propound such an interpretation. Mines were always con- 
sidered places of a special kind. There could not be such spots 
of concentrated wealth without some reason, and was it not 
logical to assume that the earth would not yield her treasures 
without resistance? Many writers on mining mention the 
spirits that inhabit the mines and threaten the workers’ lives, 
and many superstitions connected with mining have survived 
to our day. Paracelsus frequently heard of local traditions 
according to which a mining region had been inhabited by 
strange beings in the days of old. 

The elemental beings have one more purpose. They are a 
warning to man. Their appearance, like that of angels, reminds 
man of God’s almightiness and is a warning for him to amend 
his life and to serve God in humility and devotion. They also 
warn him that God could exterminate the human race and still 
keep the earth populated with beings similar to man. 

Toward the end of the treatise Paracelsus describes another 
kind of beings still more strange than the former, the sirens, 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 221 


giants, dwarfs and will-o’-the-wisps. He has a scientific expla- 
nation for their origin. They are monsters. Just as two per- 
fectly normal human parents can give birth to a monster, so 
do the elemental beings. Thus, the sirens are monsters of the 
water people, the giants of the sylphs, the dwarfs of the pygmies, 
and the will-o’-the-wisps of the salamanders. Like human mon- 
sters they occur rarely and their kind dies out soon. They are 
abnormal happenings like comets and earthquakes, and their 
appearance signifies impending disaster. Thus they are power- 
ful omina, like comets and earthquakes. 

Paracelsus collected the various popular traditions about 
the elemental and other spirits that had come down from pagan 
antiquity. He did not render them the way he found them, 
and did not accept the official view that they were devils. He 
pondered over them and tried to determine their place and func- 
tion in the system of nature. Since personal observations were 
hardly available to him, he had to rely on traditions; but he 
analyzed them as he did other phenomena of nature, other crea- 
tions of God. And he found a place for them in nature where 
their existence and function had meaning and significance. He 
did it without having recourse to the devil for an explanation, 
and his attitude toward them was infinitely more humane than 
that of most of his contemporaries. 

In this as in other treatises Paracelsus expressed views that 
were not orthodox. In this book he opposed not the physicians 
but the theologians, and he did not expect to have his views 
accepted during his lifetime. He wrote such books because he 
could not help writing them, in order to clarify his own thought, 
because he wanted to understand heaven and earth, God and 
nature. The last paragraph of the treatise is at the same time 
bitter and hopeful. Paracelsus feels misunderstood, but the day 
will come when the real and the false scholars will be revealed 
for what they were, those who wrote the truth and those who 
lied, those who were right and those who were wrong. At that 
time he hopes that his work will find due recognition. 

Like the other theological writings, the treatise On Nymphs, 
Sylphs, Pygmies, and Salamanders was not published during 


222 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


Paracelsus’ life. It was first printed in 1566 as a separate 
treatise.° In 1567 it was included in a collection of his philo- 
sophical writings * which was later translated into Latin and 
published in 1569.° The treatise appeared again in Huser’s 
edition of the Collected Works, having been copied, as Huser 
said, from Paracelsus’ own manuscript.° In the early 19th cen- 
tury it was again printed, twice in German and once in Italian.*° 

Rationalism killed the belief in elemental spirits, but they 
continued to live in fairy tales and remained a favorite subject 
of poets and writers who made frequent use of Paracelsus’ 
treatise. In our days, Jean Giraudoux, in the preface to his 
charming play Ondine, has acknowledged his debt to Paracelsus. 

A history of the elemental spirits in religion, theology, philos- 
ophy, literature and art has still to be written. It is a fascinat- 
ing topic, and its treatment would illustrate the history of 
civilization from many angles. In such a history Paracelsus 
would take an important place. His treatise not only presents 
the subject in a new light but also reveals the personality of its 
author, his approach to nature as a scientist and mystic. It 
also is a testimony of his profound respect and deep love for all 
objects of nature. With Leonardo da Vinci he could have said: 


L’amore é tanto pint fervente, quanto la cognizione é pit certa. 


® Ex libro de nymphis, sylvanis, pygmaeis, salamandris, et gigantibus etc. 
Nissae Silesiorum, Excudebat Ioannes Cruciger, 1566. 

7 Philosophiae magnae Tractatus aliquot. Getruckt zu Coln, bey Arnoldi 
Byrckmans Erben, 1567. 

8 Philosophiae magnae Collectanea quaedam. Per Gerardum Dorn é Ger- 
manico sermone... Latiné reddita. Basileae, apud Petrum Pernam, 1569. 

®Neundter Theil Der Biicher und Schrifften . . . Paracelsi . . . Durch 
Tohannem Huserum. Getruckt zu Basel, durch Conrad Waldkirch, 1590, pp. 
45-78. 

Tn: D. Valentin Schmidt, Bettrége zur Geschichte der romantischen 
Poesie, Berlin, 1818.—Blatter fiir hohere Wahrheit. Aus altern und neuern 
Handschriften und seltenen Biichern. Mit besonderer Riicksicht auf Mag- 
netismus. Herausgegeben von Johann Friedrich von Meyer. Zweyte Samm- 
lung. Nebst einer Abbildung in Steindruck. Frankfurt am Mayn, bey 
Heinrich Ludwig Bronner, 1820—Ondina, Racconto Del Barone Federico 
De La Motte Fouqué con un estratto di Teofrasto Paracelso sugli esseri 
elementari. Milano, Per Ant. Fort. Stella e Figli, 1836. 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 223 


LIBER 


DEN MMPS, SYLPHISSPYGMAEIS ET, SALA 
MANDRIS ET DE CAETERIS SPIRITIBUS 
THEOPHRASTI HOHENHEIMENSIS 


Prologus 


We are familiar and well acquainted with the creation of all 
and every natural object that God has brought into existence. 
Every country has cognizance of its own, of what occurs and 
grows in it. Every man has cognizance of himself. Thus also 
an art and a craft have knowledge of their subjects. In such a 
way cognizance is obtained of all creations that God has 
brought into existence, and nothing is concealed that man did 
not or would not know. That does not mean that all knowl- 
edge is in one, namely, that one man knew all this, but each 
one his field. When they all come together, then everything 
is known. It does not mean either that every country has 
knowledge of every other country, but each of its own, and 
when they are all taken together, then all is known. And every 
city, village, house, etc. has its own cognizance of all natural 
objects. And in the arts and crafts, all created objects are being 
used, one in this, one in that, and while they are all being used, 
we come to understand for what purpose they have been created. 
And the final conclusion is that everything is subservient 
and subject to man. There are more things, however, than those 
which are comprehended and recognized in the light of nature, 
things which are above and superior to it. But these cannot 
be understood against the light of nature, that is in the light 
of nature, but in the light of man which is above the light of 
nature. There they may be understood. For nature emits 
a light by which it may be perceived from its own radiance. 
But in man there is also a light, outside the light born in 
nature. This is the light by which man hears, learns and pene- 
trates supernatural things. Those who search in the light of 
nature, talk of nature. Those who search in the light of man, 


224 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


talk of more than nature. For man is more than nature. He 
is nature. He is also a spirit. He is also an angel. He has 
the qualities of all these three. When he walks in nature, he 
serves nature. When he walks in the spirit, he serves the spirit. 
When he walks in the angel, he serves as an angel. The first is 
given the body, the others are given the soul and are its 
treasure. Since man has a soul and the other two, he elevates 
himself above nature, to explore also that which is not in nature, 
especially to learn about and explore hell, the devil and his 
realm. In the same way man also explores the heaven and 
its essence, namely God and his realm. For he who must go to 
a place should know the character of the place in advance; 
then he will be able to travel wherever he pleases. Know there- 
fore that the purpose of this book is to describe the creatures 
that are outside the cognizance of the light of nature, how they 
are to be understood, what marvellous works God has created. 
For it is man’s function to learn about things and not to be 
blind about them. He has been equipped to talk about the 
marvellous works of God and to present them. It is possible 
for man to explore the essence and qualities of every single 
work that God has created. For nothing has been created that 
man could not explore, and it has been created so that man 
may not be idle but walk in the path of God, that is, in his 
works. Not in vice, not in fornication, not in gambling, not 
in drinking, not in plundering, not in the acquisition of goods 
nor in the accumulation of riches for the worms. But to apply 
his spirit, his light, his angelic kind to the contemplation of 
divine objects. There is more bliss in describing the nymphs 
than in describing medals. There is more bliss in describing 
the origin of the giants than in describing court etiquettes. 
There is more bliss in describing Melusine than in describing 
cavalry and artillery. There is more bliss in describing the 
mountain people underground than in describing fencing and 
service to ladies. For in these things the spirit is used to move 
in divine works, while in the other things the spirit is used to 
seek the world’s manner and applause, in vanity and dishonesty. 
He who experiences and hears much on earth will also be 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 225 


learned in the resurrection while he who knows nothing, will 
be inferior. For there are many mansions in God’s house and 
each one will find his mansion according to his learning. We 
are all learned but not equally, all wise but not equally, all 
skillful but not equally; he who searches deeply is most. For 
research and seeking experience thrive in God and avoid the 
vices of the world; they flee worldy service, obedience to princes, 
court manners, nice gestures; they learn tongues, in which are 
also lies and curses. But God’s miraculous works—man’s light 
learns them and does not ask tongues for it. Obedience to 
God, this is man’s command. Obedience to men, what else is 
it than a vain shadow? Man does not pay for obedience, has 
no reward for it. He dies, and when he is dead, he is dirt. 
What does man make of himself? He must learn more than 
obedience, and let obedience be, and love his neighbor; then 
obedience will come out by itself, as the flower and fruit come 
out of a good tree. Oh, how joyful is he who thinks in the 
following of his creator! He finds pearls that will not be 
thrown to the swine. But he who thinks in the following of man 
searches for pearls like a sow which stirs up everything and 
does not find anything of use. And so, know how to under- 
stand the beginning of this book. I am not writing about 
lovely matters and nice stories, but about supernatural matters 
that do not require nice stories, but let gossip be what it is. 


16 


226 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHFIM 


LIBER INCIPIT. THEOPHRASTI 


TractTatus I 


CAPM ARAL 


To begin with, it is only fair that I explain the subject about 
which I write hereafter, what it is all about. Know, there- 
fore, that the purpose of this book is to describe the four 
kinds of spirit-men, namely, the water people, the mountain 
people, the fire people and the wind people. Included among 
these four kinds are the giants, the melusines, the Venusberg 
and what is similar to them. We consider them to be men, 
although not from Adam, but other creatures, apart from man 
and all other animals, in spite of the fact that they come among 
us and children are born from them, although not of their own 
kind, but of our kind. How things are in relation to us will 
have to be described in the following order: First, their crea- 
tion and what they are; second, their country and habitation, 
where they stay and what their mode of living is; third, how 
they come to us and let themselves be seen, how they mix and 
have intercourse with us; fourth, how they perform some 
miraculous works, such as Melusine, the Venusberg and similar 
stories; fifth, the birth of the giants and their origin, and also 
their vanishing and return. 

It is true that a philosopher must build on the Holy Scrip- 
tures and take his arguments from them. But in the Scriptures 
nothing special is written about these things, what to make of 
them or how to explore them. There are some remarks about 
the giants only. Although these things are treated outside the 
Scriptures, their exploration is justified by the fact that they 
appear and exist. These things must be explored just like 
magic, if we are to believe in it—and we do and wish to as- 
certain its origin. The writers of the Bible and the New Testa- 
ment discussed how the soul has to act toward God and God 
toward the soul, so that this philosophy may not fall back. 
But if we are permitted knowledge about the devil and about 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 227 


spirits and similar subjects, then this is something that has to 
be explored also, in regard to its nature. We have the power 
to travel in all the works of God, the physician in the natural 
remedy, the apostle in the apostolic remedy. For, as a sick man 
calls for a physician, things call for a philosopher, and a Chris- 
tian for his Redeemer, and every work for his master. Such 
creatures are also necessary and also represent their condition, 
and they have not been created in vain. For, Samson was a 
man. Now, he had strength over all men, which was not natural 
nor credible, and it resided in the hair; this is considered by 
men as superfluous and unnecessary, but it has its reason why 
it must exist. David who was a small man, killed the giant 
Goliath. It had to be, and yet did not seem humanly possible. 
Hence, nothing has been created that has not a mystery, and 
it may be a great one. In the Old Testament queer stories 
happen which nobody can interpret, and then the New Testa- 
ment teaches him about them; how things are finally found in 
a given place, why they occurred and from what cause. Thus 
one learns that they occurred indeed. The same applies to the 
things about which I write in the following—people find them 
unnecessary and find that it is useless to talk about them. But 
since there is a reason for them which will be apparent, about 
which I shall write the sixth treatise, therefore it is not un- 
necessary but necessary to explore the things, and to include 
them in our philosophy and speculation, to contemplate these 
things together with others, what their final purpose is. 


CAPUT SECUNDUM 


SPIRITUS QUID ET ANIMA, ITEM SPIRITUS HORUM CARO EST 
ET CARO SPIRITUS; EXEMPLUM RESURRECTIONIS. 


The flesh must be understood thus that there are two: the 
flesh from Adam and that which is not from Adam. The flesh 
from Adam is a coarse flesh, for it is earthen and is nothing 
else but a flesh that can be bound and grasped like wood or a 
stone. The other flesh which is not from Adam, is a subtile 
flesh and can not be bound nor grasped, for it is not made 


228 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


from earth. Now, the flesh from Adam is the man from Adam. 
He is coarse like the earth which is compact. And, therefore, 
man cannot go through a wall. He must make a hole to slip 
through, because nothing recedes before him. But before the 
flesh that is not from Adam, walls recede, which means that 
such flesh does not require doors nor holes; it goes through 
intact walls and does not break anything. They are both flesh, 
blood, bone and so on, whatever belongs to a man, and in their 
whole nature they are like man’s. But they are different in 
that they have a double origin like two cousins; they are in 
equal way like a spirit and like man. The spirit goes through 
all walls and nothing locks him out; man, however, not, for 
he is locked out by the bolt or the lock. Just as you can dis- 
tinguish and differentiate between a spirit and a man, so you 
shall recognize the people about whom I am writing but with 
the difference that they are separated from the spirits by having 
blood and flesh and bones. With all this, they bear children, 
talk and eat, drink and walk—things that spirits do not. Hence, 
they are like the spirits in speed, like man in gestures, figure 
and eating, and so they are people who have the character of 
spirits and also that of man, and both are one in them. 
Although they are both spirit and man, yet they are neither 
one nor the other. They cannot be men, since they are spirit- 
like in their behaviour. They cannot be spirits, since they eat 
and drink, have blood and flesh. Therefore, they are a crea- 
tion of their own, outside the two, but of the kind of both, a 
mixture of both, like a composite remedy of two substances 
which is sour and sweet, and yet does not seem it, or two colors 
mixed together which become one and yet are two. It must be 
understood further that although they are spirit and man, yet 
they are neither. Man has a soul, the spirit not. The spirit 
has no soul, but man has one. This creature, however, is both, 
but has no soul, and yet is not identical with a spirit. For, the 
spirit does not die, but this creature dies. And so it is not like 
man, it has not the soul; it is a beast, yet higher than a beast. 
It dies like a beast and the animal body has no soul either, only 
man. That is why it is a beast. But they talk, laugh like man; 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 229 


this is why they are more like men than like beasts, but are 
neither man nor beast. They are to man like a monkey which 
is the animal resembling man most in gestures and actions. And 
as a pig has man’s anatomy, being inside like man, yet a pig 
and not a man—in the same way these creatures are to man as 
monkeys and pigs, and yet better than they. For they are in 
everything like men, but without soul, and better than man, for 
they are like the spirits which nobody can lift. Christ died and 
was born for those who have a soul, that is who are from Adam, 
and not for those who are not from Adam, for they are men but 
have no soul. So much can be gathered from the Scriptures 
about them that they must be admitted to be men; but as far 
as the soul is concerned there is no knowledge of their having 
one. 

Nobody should wonder that there are such creatures. For 
God is miraculous in his works which he often lets appear 
miraculously. For these things are not daily before our eyes 
but very rarely; and we see them only in order that we may 
know of their existence, for they exist, and yet appear to us as 
in a dream. The great wisdom of God cannot be fathomed, 
nor can his great miraculous works be fathomed, not more 
than is needed to recognize our creator in his miraculous deeds. 

Now, they are separated from us because they are not from 
Adam and do not participate in the same earth from which 
Adam was made, but God has decreed that we may see them 
miraculously, which has a particular meaning, as will be dis- 
cussed in the last treatise. They have children and their children 
are their kind, not ours. They are witty, rich, clever, poor, dumb 
like we who are from Adam. They resemble us in every way. 
Just as one says: man is the image of God, that is, he has been 
made after his image—in the same way one can also say: these 
people are the image of man and made after his image. Now, 
man is not God although he is made like him, but only as an 
image. The same here: they are not men because they are made 
after his image, but remain the same creatures as they have 
been created, just as man remains the same as God has created 
him. Thus he wants every creature to remain at the place where 


230 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


it has been created. And as man cannot boast that he is God, 
but a creation of God, thus made by God, and God wants it 
thus—in the same way these people cannot boast that they 
have a soul like man, although they look like him. Just as man 
cannot boast that he is God although he is made after him and 
exists. Thus man lacks that he is not God. And the wild 
people lack the soul. Therefore they cannot say that they are 
men. And so the one lacks God, the other the soul. Thus God 
alone is God, and man alone is man. 

And so they are men and people, die with the beasts, walk 
with the spirits, eat and drink with men. That is: like the 
beasts they die, so that nothing is left; and neither water nor 
fire harms them, like the spirits, and nobody can lock them 
up, like the spirits, but they reproduce like men and therewith 
share his nature. They have man’s diseases and his health but 
their medicine is not from the earth from which man is made, 
but from the element in which they live. They die like men, 
but are dead like the beasts. Their flesh rots like other flesh 
and their bones like other men’s bones and nothing remains of 
it. Their customs and behaviour are human, as is their way 
of talking, with all virtues, better and coarser, more subtile and 
rougher. The same applies to their figures : they are very differ- 
ent, like men. In food they are like men, eat and enjoy the 
product of their labor, spin and weave their own clothing. They 
know how to make use of things, have wisdom to govern, 
justice to preserve and protect. For although they are beasts, 
they have all the reason of man, except the soul. Therefore, 
they have not the judgment to serve God, to wall in his path, 
for they have not the soul. The beast from inborn nature 
seeks a just course toward itself, and so do they, but they have 
the highest reason, above all other animals. Just as man, above 
all creatures, is closest to God on earth in intelligence and facul- 
ties, so they are, among all animals, closest to man and so close 
that they are called people and men and are held and taken for 
such, so that there is no difference except in their spirit-like 
way and in the lack of soul—a queer and marvellous creature, 
to be considered above all others. 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 231 


Tractatus II 


ABOUT THEIR ABODE 


Their abode is of four kinds, namely, according to the four 
elements : one in the water, one in the air, one in the earth, one 
in the fire. Those in the water are nymphs, those in the air are 
sylphs, those in the earth are pygmies, those in the fire sala- 
manders. These are not good names, but I use them neverthe- 
less. The names have been given them by people who did not 
understand them. But since they designate the things and since 
they can be recognized by the names, I shall leave it at that. 
The name of the water people is also undina, and of the air 
people sylvestres, and of the mountain people gnomi, and of 
the fire people vulcani rather than salamandri. Whatever it 
may be, and however the differentiation may be understood, 
let it stay. Now you must know that if their regions have to 
be described, they must be divided into their parts. For the 
water people have no intercourse with the mountain people, 
nor the mountain people with them, nor the salamanders. Each 
has his special abode, but they appear to man, as mentioned, 
so that he may recognize and see how marvellous God is in his 
works, that he does not leave any element void and empty, 
without having great wonders in them. And now follow the 
four regions, which explains the difference of abode, also of 
person, essence and kind, how far they differ from each, yet 
more similar to man than to each other, and yet all men, as was 
explained in the first treatise. 

You know that there are four elements: air, water, earth and 
fire; and you also know that we, men from Adam, stand and 
walk in air and are surrounded by it as a fish by water, and we 
can just as little be without it as a fish without water. As the 
fish has its abode in water, where water takes for it the place of 
the air in which it lives, so air takes for man the place of water, 
in relation to the fish. Thus everything has been created in its 
element, to walk therein. From this example you understand 


232 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


that the undinae have their abode in water, and the water is 
given to them as to us the air, and just as we are astonished 
that they should live in water, they are astonished about our 
being in the air. The same applies to the gnomi in the moun- 
tains: the earth is their air and is their chaos. For everything 
lives in chaos, that is: everything has its abode in chaos, walks 
and stands therein. Now, the earth is not more than mere 
chaos to the mountain manikins. For they walk through solid 
walls, through rocks and stones, like a spirit; this is why these 
things are all mere chaos to them, that is, nothing. That 
amounts to: as little as we are hampered by the air, as little 
are they hampered by the mountain, by earth and rocks. And 
as it is easy for us to walk through air and air cannot stop us, 
so rocks and cliffs are easy to them. And so, things are all 
chaos to them which are not chaos to us. For a wall, a 
partition, stops us so that we cannot go through, but to them it 
is a chaos. That is why they walk through it; to them it is 
their air in which they live and walk, as man does in the air 
that is between heaven and earth. And the coarser the chaos, 
the more subtile is the creature; and the more subtile the 
chaos the coarser the creature. The mountain people have a 
coarse chaos; therefore, they must be the more subtile; and man 
has a subtile chaos; therefore, he is all the coarser. And thus 
there are different kinds of chaos, and the inhabitants are 
adapted in nature and quality to live in them. 

Thus one wonder is explained, that of their abode, and you 
know now that their habitation in the four elements is their 
chaos, just as the air is for us, and there cannot be such acci- 
dents to them as drowning, or suffocating or burning, for the 
elements are nothing but air to the creatures who live in them. 
Since water is the fish’s air, the fish does not drown, and so the 
unda does not drown either. As in the water, so in the earth: 
the earth is air to the gnomi; hence they do not suffocate. They 
do not require our air, we do not theirs. Thus also with the 
salamanders: fire is their air, as our air our air is. And the 
sylvestres are closest to us, for they too maintain themselves 
in our air, and they are exposed to the same kind of death as 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 230 


we, namely: they burn in fire, and we too; they drown in 
water, and we too; they suffocate in the earth, and we too. 
For, each remains healthy in his chaos; in the others he dies. 

Therefore, you must not be astonished about things that 
seem incredible to us; to God everything is possible. He has 
created all things for us, not according to our thoughts and 
intelligence, but above our thoughts and intelligence. For, he 
wants to be looked upon as a God who is marvellous in his 
creations. Had nothing been created but merely what is possi- 
ble for man to believe, God would be all too weak, and man 
would be his equal. This is why he has created things as a God, 
and let man marvel about them, and let his works be so big, 
that no one can marvel enough about these beings also. God 
wants to have it thus. 

Let us philosophize further, about their food. Know that each 
chaos has its two spheres, the heaven and the soil, just as we 
men walk on earth. Earth and heaven give us our food and 
the chaos is in between the two. Thus we are nourished in 
between the two spheres and the globules. Thus also, those who 
live in the water, have the earth at the bottom, and the water 
as chaos, and the heaven down to the water; and so they are 
in between heaven and earth and the water is their chaos. 
And their abode is according to their kind. Thus also with the 
gnomi, whose soil is water, and whose chaos is terra, and the 
heaven is their sphaera, that is, the earth stands in water. To 
them the earth is chaos and the water the soil. Food grows to 
them in such a way. The sylphs are like men, nourish them- 
selves like men in the wilderness, on herbs in the woods. To the 
salamanders the soil is earth, their heaven is the air, and fire 
their chaos. Thus food grows to them from the earth and from 
fire, and the constellation from air is their heaven. Now, about 
the things they eat and drink, you may understand so much. 
Water quenches our thirst, but not that of the gnomi, nor of 
the nymphs, nor of the other two. Further: if water has been 
created for us, to quench our thirst, then another water must 
have been created for them, that we cannot see nor explore. 
Drink they must, but drink that which in their world is a 


234 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


drink. Eat they must similarly, according to the content of their 
world. One cannot find out more about these things, but only 
that their world has its own nature, just as ours has. 

About their clothing: they are clothed and cover their 
genitalia, but not in the way of our world, in their own way. 
For they have modesty and similar qualities, as men must have, 
have law and similar institutions, have their authorities, like 
the ants, which have their king, and the wild geese, which have 
their leader, not according to the law of men, but according 
to their inborn nature. The animals have their chief, and so 
have they too, and more than all animals, because they are most 
similar to man. God has clothed all beings and endowed them 
with modesty, to walk and stand before man. To the beasts 
clothing is inborn by nature, but not to these people. To them 
nothing is inborn by nature; they must work for it like man 
whom they resemble. Their work, like man’s work, is in the 
nature and kind of their own world and earth on which they 
live. For he who gave us wool from sheep, gives it to them 
also. For it is possible for God to create not only the sheep 
which are known to us, but also the same in fire, in water, in 
the earth. For he clothes not only us, but also the gnomi, the 
nymphs, the salamanders, the sylvestres. They are all under the 
protection of God and are all clothed and guided by him. For 
God has not only power to provide for man, but also for any- 
thing else, of which man knows nothing, and of which he 
becomes slowly aware. And when he sees and hears something, 
it is a miracle to him that bears no fruit, that is: he gives it no 
further thought, but remains obstinate and blind, like one who 
with good eyes has not the grace to see. 

About their day, night, sleeping and waking, know that they 
rest, sleep and are awake like men, that is, in the same measure 
as man. With that, they have the sun and firmament as well 
as we. That is: the mountain manikins have the earth which is 
their chaos. To them it is only an air and no earth as we have 
it. From this we must conclude that they see through the 
earth, as we do through the air, and that the sun shines to them 
through the earth, as it does to us through the air, and that 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 235 


they have the sun, the moon and the whole firmament in front 
of their eyes, as we men, To the undinae the water is their 
chaos, and water does not keep them from the sun; and just as 
we have the sun through the air, they have it through the water, 
in the same measure. Thus also to the vulcans through the 
fire. And in the same way as the sun shines on us and ferti- 
lizes the earth, know that the same happens to them as to us. 
The consequence is, that they too have summer, winter, day and 
night, etc. But they do not need rain, snow, etc. They have it 
in a different way than we. These are the great miracles of 
God. From all this we must conclude that they have pestilence, 
fevers, pleurisies, and all diseases of the heaven, just as we do, 
and that they follow us in all these matters, since they are men. 
But in the judgment of God, in the resurrection, they will be 
beasts and not men. 

About their figures, know that they are different. The water 
people look like men, both women and men. The sylvestres do 
not conform, but are cruder, coarser, longer and stronger than 
both. The mountain people are small, of about two spans. The 
salamanders are long, narrow and lean. Their place and abode 
are in their chaos, as was mentioned before. The nymphs live 
in water, in running brooks, etc., so close that they grasp the 
people who ride through or bathe therein. The mountain people 
are in the mountain chaos, and there they build their houses. 
This is why it often happens that one finds in the earth an 
attic, vaults, and similar structures, of the height of about a 
yard. They have been build by these people for their abode 
and dwellings. The water people do the same in their various 
places. Know also that the mountain people live in the caves 
of the mountains and this is why strange structures occur and 
are found in such places. These are their work. Know also about 
the fire people whose yelling, hammering and working can be 
heard in volcanic mountains. It can also be heard when the 
elements are incinerated. For all these things are the same as 
with us, but according to their secret quality. Those who travel 
through wild regions learn the reason for such beings and 
obtain information. There these beings are found. In the mines 


236 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


also, close to good ore, etc. they are found, and in waters the 
same also, and the vulcans near the Aetna. And there are 
many more marvellous things, about their coins, payments and 
customs, which would be too long in this connection, but will 
be described in their place. 


Tractatus III 


HOW THEY COME TO US AND BECOME VISIBLE TO US 


All that God has created, he reveals to man and lets come 
before him, so that man has and attains knowledge of all 
happenings of the creatures. Thus God has revealed the Devil 
to man, so that man knows about the Devil, and he has pre- 
sented the spirits and other matters still more impossible for 
man to perceive. The angels in the heaven he has also sent 
down to man, so that man may really see that God has angels 
who serve him. Such revelations do occur, but rarely, only 
as often as is needed to believe and have faith in them. The 
same happens with the beings about whom I am writing here. 
They appear also. Not in order to have them all live or stay 
or mix with us, but God lets them wander to us and be with us 
as often as is needed for us to take cognizance of them and to 
know that God creates marvellous works. When he sends an 
angel to us, we learn that the Scriptures speak truthfully of 
them; and once we know that of one thing, we know enough 
forever and ever, as long as the seed of man lasts, so that it is 
not necessary to present things every day. And thus God has 
also presented these creatures to man, has allowed them to be 
seen, to deal with the people and talk, and so on, in order that 
man may know that there are such creatures in the four ele- 
ments who miraculously appear before our eyes. And in order 
that we may have a good knowledge of things, the water people 
have not only been truly seen by man, but have married him 
and have born him children. Thus also, the mountain people 
have not only been seen, but people saw them, and talked to 
them, and received money from them and blows and similar 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 237 


things. The same happened with the forest people, as was men- 
tioned before, the people saw them and dealt and walked with 
them. Thus also, with the vulcans, who also, as mentioned 
before, appeared to man, and revealed themselves essentially, 
who they were and what had to be understood of them all. 

And so many have been held before man that from them he 
may draw and take an adequate philosophy, to be explored 
adequately in the works of God, by the light of man which has 
been given to man alone, beyond all other creatures. For the 
like must be perceived by its like, that is, man is a spirit and a 
man, eternal and mortal. From this reasonably follows a knowl- 
edge of the other things, namely, that he is one who has been 
created from God after God. Thus man can not philosophize 
at any time about anything unless he has a subject from which 
his reasoning springs and on which it is founded. If such a 
man is possessed by the evil spirit he must now, at any time, 
consider what this means. For nothing exists that remains 
concealed and is not revealed. Everything must come out, 
creature, nature, spirit, evil and good, outside and inside, and 
all arts, and all doctrines, teachings and what has been created. 
Sometimes, such things become apparent only insofar as they 
are preserved in the memory of the people. They are still hid- 
den and not generally known. It is not less true that man never 
becomes as apparent to others as these beings become apparent 
to man. The nymphs, namely, become apparent to us, but not 
we to them, except in what they tell about us in their world, 
as a pilgrim would, who had been in foreign lands. They do 
not need such rapture, the way the mountain people enrapture 
us, or the water people. For they have no power over man, and 
their world is not such that they could adopt us. Man is not 
subtile in body, but coarse in body and subtile in chaos, while 
it is the contrary with them. Therefore, they can well stand 
our chaos, but not we theirs. Their element also is in itself their 
chaos, which to us may not be chaos. Thus they appear to us, 
stay with us, marry with us, die with us, and also bear children. 

Now, the fact that they shall be revealed, is equal to a divine 
decree. God sends an angel to us, recommends his creature 


238 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


to him, and then takes him away again. And in the same way, 
these beings are presented sufficiently before our eyes. This 
happens with the water people. They come out of their waters 
to us, make themselves known, act and deal with us, go back to 
their water, come again—all this to allow man the contempla- 
tion of the divine works. Now, they are men, but on the animal 
side alone, without the soul. From this it follows that they marry 
men. A water woman takes a man from Adam, and keeps house 
for him, and gives birth to children. Of the children, we know 
that they follow after the father. Because the father is a man 
from Adam, a soul is given to the child, and it becomes like a 
regular man, who has an eternal soul. Furthermore, this also 
is well known and must be considered, that such women also 
receive souls by becoming married, so that they are saved 
before God and by God like other women. It has been experi- 
enced in many ways that they are not eternal, but when 
they are bound to men, they become eternal, that is, endowed 
with a soul like man. You must understand this in the follow- 
ing way: God has created them so much like man and so 
resembling him, that nothing could be more alike, and a wonder 
happened in that they had no soul. But when they enter into 
a union with man, then the union gives the soul. It is the same 
as with the union that man has with God and God with man, 
a union established by God, which makes it possible for us 
to enter the kingdom of God. If there were no such union, of 
what use would the soul be to us? Of none. But now there is 
that union with man, and therefore the soul is of use to man, 
who otherwise would have no purpose. This is demonstrated 
by them also: they have no soul, unless they enter into a union 
with men, and now they have the soul. They die, and nothing 
remains of them but the beast. And a man who is not in divine 
union is just like them. Just as the condition of these people 
is, when they are in union with man, so is the condition of man, 
when he is in union with God. And thus they demonstrate 
that they are beasts without man, and like them man without 
divine union is nothing. The union of two things with each 
other can achieve so much, that the inferior benefits from the 
superior and acquires its power. 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 239 


From this it follows that they woo man, and that they seek 
him assiduously and in secret. A heathen begs for baptism and 
woos it in order to acquire his soul and to become alive in 
Christ. In the same way, they seek love with man, so as to be 
in union with men. With them all intelligence and wisdom are 
outside the qualities of the soul, and not the soul. And so they 
receive the soul, and their children also, by virtue of Adam’s 
fruit, freedom and power, which holds and carries them to God. 
One must also think of what God will do with them in the end, 
since they are so close to man and must be considered as wild 
men; just as you say, the wolf is a wild dog, the ibex a wild 
he-goat and such like. One must also know that not all of them 
may be married to us. The water people come first; they are 
the closest to us. Next after them come the forest people, then 
the mountain and earth manikins who, however, rarely marry 
humans and are only obliged to serve them. The vulcans never 
attempt to enter into union with humans, and yet are apt to 
serve them. Know also that two of them, namely the earth 
manikins and vulcans, are considered spirits and not creatures, 
being looked upon as a mirage only, or as ghosts. You must 
know, however, that just as they appear, thus they are, flesh and 
blood like another man, and with that, quick and fast like a 
spirit, as was told in the beginning. They also know all future 
affairs, present affairs and the past, which are not apparent but 
are hidden. In that they can serve man, protect, warn, guide 
him, and such like. For they have reason in common with man 
(except in regard to the soul). They have knowledge and 
intelligence of the spirit (except in regard to God). Thus they 
are highly gifted, and they know and warn, so that man may 
learn about such things, and see them, and believe in such 
creatures. For this purpose God has let them appear to man, 
that he may seek knowledge and learn what God effects in such 
creatures. 

It is said of the nymphs, that they come to us from the water, 
and sit on the banks of the brooks where they have their abode, 
where they are seen, taken also, caught, and married, as we 
said before. The forest people, however, are coarser than they. 


240 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


They do not talk, that is, they cannot talk although they have 
tongues and enough of all that is needed for speech. In this 
point they differ from the nymphs, for the nymphs can speak in 
the languages of the countries; the forest people, however, can- 
not but they learn easily. The mountain manikins are endowed 
with speech like the nymphs, and the vulcans speak nothing, 
yet they can speak but roughly and rarely. The nymphs 
appear, as was said before, in human clothing, with human 
features and desires. The forest people are like men, but shy 
and fugitive. The mountain people are like men, not tall, short; 
sometimes they reach about half the size of man or so, some- 
times more. Thus and in the same way, the vulcans appear, 
fiery, and fire is all over their features and clothing. They are 
the ones of whom one says: a fire man or spirit is going through 
the house; there goes a burning soul, etc. It often happens 
that such figures are seen. They also are the flames that are 
frequently observed as glowing lights in meadows and fields, 
running through each other and towards each other. These 
are the vulcans, but they are not found living with man, on 
account of their fire. They are often found with old women, 
however, that is, with witches, wooing them. One also must 
know that the devil takes possession of them just as he does of 
men, and thus goes around with them, appearing to the people 
in the features just mentioned. And this leads and brings them 
to the witches, and many such matters that happen when things 
are possessed by the devil, but it would be much too long to 
describe them here. You must know, however, that there is 
danger with the fire people, because they are commonly pos- 
sessed, and the devil thus rages in them, which causes great 
harm to man. Know also that he equally takes possession of 
the mountain people and thus makes them subservient to him, 
and of the forest people also. He then can be found in the 
forest possessing sylphs and venturing to make love to women 
who live in forest regions. But they all become like lepers, 
scabby and mangy, and there is no help for them either. 

When these beings are not possessed by the devil they are 
human and seek union as has been mentioned. But they keep 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 241 


the way of spirits, in that they disappear. One who has a 
nymph for a wife, should not let her get close to any water, or 
at least should not offend her while they are on water. And 
one who has a mountain manikin with him, should not offend 
him, particularly not at places where they get lost. But they are 
so much obliged to man and so closely bound to him, that they 
cannot get away from him, unless there is a reason for it, and 
this happens at the place from which they come. If one has 
a wife, she does not get away from him, unless she is provoked 
while they are on water. Otherwise she will not disappear 
and can be held. The mountain manikins also must keep their 
pledges, when they are in service and have been pledged. But 
obligations to them must be kept also, in all that is due to them. 
If duties are kept as should be, they are honest, constant, and 
intent on their work. And one must know that they are particu- 
larly loyal to man and much inclined to spending money. For, 
the mountain people have money, because they themselves coin 
it. This is how it must be understood. What a spirit wishes 
to have, he has, and their wishing and desiring is thus: when 
a mountain manikin wishes or desires a sum of money, if there 
is need for it, he has it, and it is good money. Thus they give 
money to many people in the galleries of mountains, to make 
them get away; they buy them off. All this is divine order— 
that they thus appear to us and that we see what is incredible 
to tell. Man is the most earthbound of all creatures. What 
he must have and wants, he must make for himself, and he 
obtains nothing by wishing and desiring it. But those people 
have what they need and desire, and man does nothing for it. 
They have it without work. 


Tractatus IV 


As we came to the end of the treatise, we had sufficiently 
discussed the necessities of these beings, and how they come to 
man. You must now, furthermore, know about their dis- 
appearance from man, and about their doings with us, with 
many such tales and stories that have happened with them, 


a 


242 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


in many queer ways. And first about those who married men 
and bore them children, as was said before. When they have 
been provoked in any way by their husbands while they are 
on water, they simply drop into the water, and nobody can 
find them any more. To the husband it is as if she were 
drowned, for he will never see her again. And yet, although 
she dropped into the water, he may not consider her dead. She 
is alive and he may not take another wife. If he did, he would 
have to pay with his life and could never return to the world, 
for the marriage is not dissolved but is still valid. It is the 
same as in the case of a wife who has run away. She is not 
divorced from her husband, nor he from her. It still is a valid 
marriage that has not been dissolved and that nobody can ever 
dissolve, as long as there is life. When she has dropped into 
the water and has abandoned husband and children, her mar- 
riage is still valid, and she will present herself on the Day of 
Judgment on account of her union and pledge. The soul, 
namely, is not taken away nor separated from her. She must 
follow the soul and hold to her pledge to the end. Although she 
remains a water woman and nymph, she must behave as the 
soul requires and the pledge she has given, except that she is 
separated from her husband, and that there is no return, unless 
he takes another wife. Then she returns and brings him death, 
as has happened many times. 

It also happens that sirens are born. They are water women 
too, but live more on the water than in it. They are not split 
like fish, but are more like a virgin, yet their form is not quite 
that of a woman. They bear no children but are monsters, just 
as a strange human being can be born from two normal parents. 
I would like to put it thus: the water people reproduce them- 
selves like humans, but when it happens that they produce a 
monster, these monsters are sirens that swim on the water, for 
they repudiate them and do not keep them. This is why they 
occur in many forms and figures, as it happens and is the case 
with all monsters. Thus we marvel not only at the water 
people but also at the sirens, who have many strange features 
and are very different from people. Some can sing, some can 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 243 


whistle with reeds, some can do this and that. Monks are also 
born from nymphs, that is, a monster which is shaped just like 
a monk. This you must know, namely, that such growths that 
are comparable to men and are found in some places, come from 
men, that is, they come from water people, earth manikins and 
similar beings. In order to understand the matter correctly, 
remember that God effects strange things in his creations. It 
is the same as with a comet. Born from other stars, the comet 
is nothing but a super-growth, that is, a growth that has not 
a natural course, as a star should have, but has been directed 
by God on purpose into another course. This is why the comet 
has great significance. And so have the sea wonders and simi- 
lar things which thus come from water people. They too are 
such regular comets that God presents to man on purpose, 
not without meaning and significance. There is no need to 
write about it here, but this you must know, that great things 
come from such people, who should be great mirrors held before 
man’s eyes. But love has cooled down in many, and thus they 
pay no attention to the signs, intent only on usury, self-interest, 
gambling, drinking, matters that are interpreted by these beings, 
as if they were saying: look at the monsters, thus you shall be 
after death; let yourself be warned, beware—but nothing is 
done about it. 

To continue the discussion of these beings, know that such 
people also convene and assemble in one place, where they may 
live together and seek intercourse with man, for they love him. 
The reason is that flesh and blood hold to flesh and blood. 
There are more women than men in such groups, few men, 
many women; hence they are after men whenever they have a 
chance. From such people a group originated that is called 
the Venusberg. It consists of nothing else but a kind of nymphs, 
thrown together in a cave and hole of their world, yet not in 
their own chaos, in man’s chaos, but in their regionibus. Know 
about them that they reach a very old age, but you cannot 
notice it, because their appearance remains the same from begin- 
ning to end, and they die unchanged. Venus was a nymph and 
undine who excelled others and reigned for a long time, but she 


244 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


died and the succeeding Venus was not as endowed as she 
had been. She died in the course of time and her kingdom 
vanished. There are many tales about her. Some people believe 
that she will live until the Day of Judgment, meaning: she 
and her seed, not she alone. And on the Day of Judgment, all 
these beings will appear before God, will dissolve and come to 
an end. It is also said that those who come to them do not die 
either. But this is not true, for all beings end in death and 
nothing remains, neither they nor other people, nothing is with- 
out an end. It is on account of the seed that all kinds survive 
to the Day of Judgment. There is a story about a different 
beginning. It tells of a queen who resided there and sank into 
the earth. It was a water woman who resided there. She went 
into the mountain, under the pond that was above her, in her 
region. There she took her abode, and for making love, she 
built a gallery, for her to get to the lads and they to her. 
Such strange things happened there that nobody was able to 
report about these beings, what they were or where they were 
from, until it came to an end. It is quite possible that this could 
happen again should another nymph come, equal to her. How 
often does it not happen that a man is amazingly superior to 
others, and then for many years there is nobody equal to him. 
Thus a special portent occurred about the nymphs, was called 
the Venusberg, after the idol of unchastity. Many such strange 
stories have happened on earth, but they have been greatly 
despised. Yet, it should not be, because no such thing occurs 
without great attention being paid to it. Hence, they should 
not be despised. There is no need of writing about it here. 
There is also a true story of the nymph in Staufenberg who 
sat on the road in all her beauty and served the lord she had 
chosen. It is quite correct that to the theologians such a being 
is a devilish ghost, but certainly not to the true theologians. 
What greater admonition is there in the Scriptures than to 
despise nothing, to ponder everything in mature understanding 
and judgment, to explore all things and dismiss nothing with- 
out previous exploration. It becomes easily apparent that they 
have little understanding of these beings. Making it short, they 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 245 


call them devils, although they know little enough about the 
devil himself. This you must know, that God lets such miracles 
happen not to have us all marry nymphs and live with them, 
but once in a while, in order to demonstrate the strange doings 
of divine creatures and that we may see the work of his labor. 
If it were the devil’s work it should be despised, but it is not, 
for this he is not able to do; God alone is. Our nymph was a 
water woman. She promised herself to von Staufenberg and 
stayed also with him, until he married another wife, and took 
her for a devil. Taking her for a devil and considering her such, 
he married another woman and thus broke his promise to her. 
Therefore, at the wedding, she gave him the sign, through 
the ceiling, during the banquet, and three days later, he was 
dead. It requires great experience to judge in such matters, 
for the breaking of a pledge never remains without sanction, 
whatever it may be, to uphold honor and honesty and to prevent 
other evil and vice. If she had been a ghost, from where would 
she have taken blood and flesh? If she had been a devil, where 
would she have hidden the devil’s marks which always go with 
it? If it had been a spirit, why should it have needed such a 
being? She was a woman and a nympha, as we have described 
them, a woman in honor, not in dishonor, and this is why she 
wanted duty and loyalty to be kept. Since they were not kept, 
she herself, from divine destiny, punished the adulterer (for 
no judge would have passed a sentence at her request, since 
she was not from Adam). Thus God granted her the punish- 
ment that is appropriate for adultery, and permitted her to be 
her own judge, since the world repudiated her as a spirit or 
devil. Many more such things have happened that are despised 
by men, badly so and it is a sign of great stupidity. 

We must pay equally great attention to Melusine, for she was 
not what the theologians considered her, but a nympha. It is 
true, however, that she was possessed by the evil spirit, of which 
she would have freed herself if she had stayed with her hus- 
band to the end. For such is the devil that he transforms these 
beings into different shapes, as he also does with the witches, 
transforming them into cats and werewolves, dogs, etc. This 


246 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


happened to her also, for she never was free of witchcraft but 
had a part in it. A superstitious belief resulted, that on Satur- 
days she had to be a serpent. This was her pledge to the devil 
for his helping her in getting a man. Otherwise, she was a 
nympha, with flesh and blood, fertile and well built to have 
children. She came from the nymphs to the humans on earth 
and lived there. But then, as superstitio seduces and vexes all 
beings, she went away from her people in her superstitious 
belief, to the places where the seduced people come who are 
bewitched in superstitionibus and spell-bound. Mind you, she 
remained the same serpent to the end of her life, and God knows 
how long it lasted. Thus these beings are warnings to us, to 
make us understand what we are on earth, and in what strange 
ways the devil deals with us and is after us in every corner. 
Nothing is hidden to him, neither in the depth of the sea nor 
in the center of the earth, where he whiles. But wherever we 
are, there is also God who redeems those who are his, in all 
places. It is stupid, however, to consider such women ghosts 
and devils on the basis of such happenings and because they 
are not from Adam. It is holding God’s works in low esteem 
to assume that they are rejected because they have supersti- 
tiones. Yet there are more superstitiones in the Roman Church 
than in all these women and witches. And so it may be a warn- 
ing that if swperstitio turns a man into a serpent, it also turns 
him into a devil. That is, if it happens to nymphs, it also hap- 
pens to you in the Roman Church. That is, you too will be 
transformed into such serpents, you who now are pretty and 
handsome, adorned with large diadems and jewels. In the end 
you will be a serpent and dragon, like Melusine and others of her 
kind. 

Therefore, consider such things carefully, and be not blind 
with seeing eyes and dumb with good tongues, particularly 
since you will not let yourselves be called dumb and blind. 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 247 


TRACTATUS V 


DE GIGANTIBUS 


On Giants 


You must know further that there are two more kinds that 
belong to the kind of nymphs and pygmies, namely, the giants 
and dwarfs, who are not born from Adam. Although it is a 
fact that Saint Christopher was a giant, yet he took birth from 
human seed, and hence we shall not write about him. But we 
shall write about the other giants, referred to in the stories of 
Bern, Sigenott, Hiltbrant, Dittrich, etc., also about the dwarf 
Laurin and others. Such stories are frequently rejected, but 
you must know that the same people who reject them, reject 
also much more important truth. They distort Christ’s word 
and put themselves into the fore. They have much more right 
to disregard things that have happened in this field, but their 
disbelief is all the same. The giants are too strong and too 
strange for us. They are beyond us, and hence we are inclined 
to deny their existence and to consider them ghosts. The same 
we wish to do with Christ. He also is too strong for us, and 
we are inclined to do with him as with the giants, so as to have 
nobody who could oppose us, or nobody whom we might fear. 

The beginning of theology is the enlightenment of man. He 
must be enlightened in all things of nature and must know them. 
Once he has judgment in these matters, he cannot take Christ 
and the Scriptures lightly but, from necessity of the inborn 
light, he must esteem them more highly and interpret them 
more broadly than the others, who see nothing but letters. This 
is why blind people should not touch the Scriptures, but only 
those who have grown up in the light of man. The others are 
inclined to become seducers and heretics. Therefore, learn and 
experience what there is to learn and experience, and do not 
tumble into the Scriptures, violating what seems incredible to 
your inexperienced brains. 

And so you must have knowledge of these two kinds, giants 


248 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


and dwarfs. The giants come from the forest people and the 
dwarfs from the earth manikins. They are monstra like the 
sirens from the nymphs. Thus these beings are born. And 
although it happens rarely, yet it happened so often and under 
such marvellous circumstances that their existence is well known 
and remembered. They are strange in size and strength, giants 
and dwarfs. There is nothing to tell about their resembling the 
kind of the parents from whom they were born, because they 
do not resemble their kind but are monstra, beyond the kind 
from which they came. Yet, they were not born in vain, but 
from divine order to signify something, and the significance 
is not small, but great. Hence, it is fair to describe their extrac- 
tion, and on some other occasion to describe also their signifi- 
cance, why God has let them be born from people, from what 
causes. It is not necessary to discuss this here for it is my inten- 
tion to discover the origin of all these creatures. 

We shall have to tell how strange and odd they appear, with 
stories and deeds that they performed on earth. And also how 
the monstra, that God ordered on purpose, have died out on 
earth without heirs of their body and blood, so that both giants 
and dwarfs are gone and have died out. 

First, we must write about their soul, how we can find out 
about it. It is thus: the parents from whom they are born 
have no soul, yet they are human, as has been said. From beasts 
that are human these beings are born. From that it follows 
that they have not inherited souls from their parents. They 
are monstra, in addition, and it is peculiar to their nature that 
they have less than their parents. From these two arguments 
it follows that they had no soul, in spite of the fact that they 
have been found performing good deeds, works, etc., sincere to 
each other and with qualities usually associated with the soul. 
But just as the parrot can talk and the monkey imitate man and 
many such things occur, their innate nature is equally able to 
perform and accomplish such things. That they should have a 
soul, however, cannot be concluded from these facts. God who 
can endow with a soul whomever he wishes, may also give these 
people a soul as he did to others. We mentioned the union 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 249 


between man and God and that between nymphs and men. And 
yet, they have not been born for the sake of the soul, but for 
the sake of the creature that God may be recognized the more 
marvellously in his creations; not that God wanted souls that 
were giants, since one man is like another in the kingdom of 
God. This is why I still consider them beasts whose soul is 
unknown to me. And although they have also performed good 
deeds, yet I cannot feel that they were seeking salvation; this 
would be hard to believe, but rather that they acted like clever 
animals. Truly, if a fox or a wolf could speak, they would not 
be very different. One must concede a great deal to natural 
understanding that does not serve the purpose served by one 
who has a soul. 

The forest people, that is, the air people, make the giants 
when they come together in intercourse, just as a conjunction 
produces a comet, an earthquake or similar happenings. When 
such a monster shall be born, it is not born following the course 
of nature, but against the rules, by special divine providence. 
There is no need to write about this here. Thus, these forest 
people join together and bear monsters, but we must write 
how and in what way. It cannot be understood except as a 
divine work and order that can be explained only in analogy 
with astronomy, when we remember the comets and the produc- 
tion of things that are not in the regular course of nature, yet 
are produced, such as the earthquake and similar happenings. 
They come and then do not recur for a long time. Thus we must 
also understand the giants. They are produced in the same 
way, by a constellation that is in men, not in heaven, for the 
heaven has nothing to do with the production of monsters such 
as these. The people are no concern to the heaven in its con- 
stellation, although they all live under the heaven and are con- 
fined by it, but they have a corpus and another chaos. There- 
fore the heaven cannot impress anything on them, for it does 
not stick. But if you can understand the natural course of the 
heaven, you can understand also an independent one, its rise, 
death and decrease. Everyone must know that if a particularly 
tall or very small person is born among us, this must not be 


\ 


250 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


attributed to the heaven but to nature’s own course. There is 
no need to write about this here. 

About the dwarfs you must know that they are born from 
the earth manikins in the mountains. ‘Hence, they are not as 
tall as the giants but are smaller in the same proportion as the 
earth manikins are smaller than the forest people. They are 
monsters also like the giants and their birth must be understood 
the same way. Thus we can highly appreciate the words of 
Saint John the Baptist who said to the Jews: And think not to 
say within yourselves, because you are the children of Abraham, 
you can resist God and defy him, as if you were not his own 
and he were nothing, as if he could not make other men. For 
I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up 
men. This must also be understood to mean that although we 
are from Adam yet there are people who are not from Adam, 
such as giants and dwarfs who are greater and stronger than 
we. It also means that if you shall not do honest work, God 
can exterminate you in the root and let you all dry out like 
fruit on a tree, and create other people thereafter. If it was- 
possible for him to make Adam and his children from limus, it 
is also possible for him to make without limus other people 
such as nymphs, giants, etc., and to populate and maintain 
his world with them. Thus they stand as a warning that we 
are not alone and cannot force God. If he can do one thing, he 
can do another also. If he can make a man seven feet long, he 
can also make him twenty or thirty feet long. This is apparent 
with the giants and similar beings, that they all are warnings 
to make us realize that God is the Lord, who can do things and 
endow a being with a soul in one breath. 

To come to an end, know that such people, giants and dwarfs, 
may well make women from Adam pregnant, because same 
likes to meet same, and nature may permit it. Yet you must 
know that the monsters are not fertile, although they are mon- 
sters only so far as their strength and size is concerned; they 
are not misbuilt. But they have only one seed available, that 
is, they do not attain the third, fourth, etc. generation. Know 
also that when they get into man’s kind, the result is uncertain. 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ’ETC. 251 


If the child’s body takes after the mother it falls into her kind; 
if not, it becomes a beast like the father. It is not possible for 
it to become a mixed being because the seed of one of the two 
always prevails. It happens otherwise that both become one 
seed, but here not. And if it were one seed it would have to be 
qualified by the one partner who gives the soul. More is said 
about this subject in other philosophical treatises, and there is 
no need to tell it here. Their kind, however, has died out and 
they have left no descendants to replace them. The comets, like- 
wise, leave no seed behind them but come straight on and off 
at times, and at times up from below, all of a sudden, and then 
disappear. 


t TractTatus VI 
ON THE CAUSES OF SUCH CREATURES 


Now that we must reflect in terms of natural philosophy 
about the causes of these creatures we must remember the facts, 
all the points, many of which have been discussed in the previous 
treatises. We need not repeat them here. Further causes that 
may be explored are these: namely, that God has set guardians 
over nature, for all things, and he left nothing unguarded. 
Thus gnomes, pygmies and mami guard the treasures of the 
earth, the metals and similar treasures. Where they are, there 
are tremendous treasures, in tremendous quantities. They are 
guarded by such people, are kept hidden and secret so that they 
may not be found until the time for it has come. When they 
are found, people say: in times-of old there used to be moun- 
tain manikins, earth people here, but now they are gone. This 
means that now the time has come for the treasures to be 
revealed. The treasures of the earth are distributed in such a 
way that the metals, silver, gold, iron, etc., have been found 
from the beginning of the world on, and are being discovered 
by and by. They are guarded and protected by these people 
so that they may not be found all at once, but one after another, 
by and by, now in this country, now in another. Thus the 
mines are shifted in the course of time from country to country 


252 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


and are distributed from the first day to the last. The same 
applies also to the fire people. They too are guardians, of the 
fireplaces, in which they live. In these places the treasures, 
that others guard, are forged, prepared, made ready. When the 
fire is extinguished, it is the earth manikins’ turn to be on 
guard. And after the earth manikins’ guard, the treasures are 
revealed. It is the same with the air people. They guard the 
rocks that lie on the surface, that have been made by the fire 
people, and put at the place where they belong, from where they 
get into man’s hands. They guard them so long, until the time 
has come. Wherever there are treasures, such people are on 
hand. These are hidden treasures that must not be revealed yet. 
Since they are guardians of such matters, we can well under- 
stand that such guardians are not endowed with a soul, yet 
similar to and like men. The nymphs in the water are guardians 
of the great water treasures, that lie in the sea and other waters, 
that have also been melted and forged by the fire people. It is, 
therefore, commonly understood that where nymphs are, there 
are considerable treasures and minerals and similar matters 
which they guard. This is apparent in many ways. 

The cause of the sirens, giants, dwarfs, also of the will-o’- 
the-wisps, who are monsters of the fire people, is that they 
predict and indicate something new. They are not on guard, 
but signify that misfortune is threatening people. Thus when 
lights are seen it means the impending downfall of that coun- 
try, that is, it commonly signifies the destruction of the mon- 
archy and similar things. Thus the giants also signify great 
impending destruction of that country and land or some other 
such great disaster. The dwarfs signify great poverty among 
the people, in many parts. The sirens signify the downfall of 
princes and lords, the rise of sects or factions. For God wants 
us all to be of one essence. What is against it, he drops. And 
when this is going to happen, signs occur. These beings are 
such signs, as has been said, but not they alone; there are many 
more. You must know that the signs change each time. They 
do not appear in one way, but are.hidden to our eyes. 

And, finally, the last cause is unknown to us. But when the 


A BOOK ON NYMPHS, SYLPHS, PYGMIES, ETC. 253 


end of the world will come close, then all things will be revealed, 
from the smallest to the largest, from the first to the last, what 
everything has been and is, why it stood there and left, from 
what causes, and what its meaning was. And everything that 
is in the world will be disclosed and come to light. Then the 
fake scholars will be exposed, those who are highly learned in 
name only but know nothing by experience. Then, the thorough 
scholars and those who are mere talkers will be recognized 
for what they are, those who wrote truthfully and those who 
traded in lies, the thorough and the shallow ones. And to each 
will be measured according to his diligence, earnest endeavor 
and truth. At that place, not everyone will be or remain a 
master, or even a doctor, because there the tares will be separated 
from the wheat and the straw from the grain. He who now 
cries, will be quieted, and he who now counts the pages, will 
have his quills taken away. And all things will be revealed before 
the Day of Judgment breaks, order that it be found of all 
scholars, from the past to that very day, who had knowledge 
and who not, whose writings were right and whose wrong. 
Now, in my time, this is still unknown. Blessed will be the 
people, in those days, whose intelligence will be revealed, for 
what they produced will be revealed to all the people as if it 
were written on their foreheads. For that time I also recom- 
mend my writings for judgment, asking that nothing be with- 
held. Thus it will be, for God makes the light manifest, that is, 
everyone will see how it has shone. 


Ay anya Fie eet aT rary 
: * Q0h5 
| or, ry ae he ie i Y Tay 


i ead Vaal a ' 
‘ Us 





LITERATURE 


1. BIBLIOGRAPHIES 


The manuscripts and editions of the works of Paracelsus and the 
chief literature about him from 1526 to 1893 are listed in Karl Sudhoff’s 
monumental bibliography: 


Karl Sudhoff, Versuch einer Krittk der Echtheit der Paracelsischen 
Schriften. I. Theil. Die unter Hohenheim’s Namen erschienenen 
Druckschriften. Berlin, 1894: Bibliographica Paracelsica, Bespre- 
chung der unter Theophrast von Hohenheim’s Namen 1527-1893 
erschienenen Druckschriften; II. Theil. Paracelsische Hand- 
schriften I. Halfte. Berlin, 1898: Paracelsus-Handschriften gesam- 
melt und besprochen; II. Halfte. Berlin, 1899. 


The literature from 1893 to 1932 with additions to the earlier periods 
was compiled by Karl Sudhoff in: 
Acta Paracelsica. Im Auftrag der Paracelsus-Gesellschaft, heraus- 
gegeben von Ernst Darmstaedter, Richard Koch, Manfred Schroeter. 
Heft 1-5. Miinchen 1930-32, Verlag der Paracelsus-Gesellschaft. 


In the United States there are two important Paracelsus collections 

of which checklists have been published: 

The Paracelsus Collection of the St. Louis Medical Society [Robert 
E. Schlueter Collection], Bulletin of the History of Medicine, 1941, 
Vol. 9, pp. 545-579. 

Paracelsus Library of Dr. Constantine Hering, The Hahnemann 
Medical College of Philadelphia, 1932, pp. 7-18. 


2. Works OF PARACELSUS 


a) In original German and Latin 

Johannes Huser, Die Biicher und Schrifften des .. . Paracelsi. 10 
Volumes, Basel, Conrad Waldkirch, 1589-91. 

Karl Sudhoff and Wilhelm Matthiessen, Theophrast von Hohenheim 
gen. Paracelsus Sdmtliche Werke: 1. Abteilung, Medizinische 
naturwissenschaftliche und philosophische Schriften. 14 Volumes. 
Munich and Berlin, 1922-1933. II. Abteilung, Die theologischen 
und religions-philosophischen Schriften. 1 Volume. Munich, 1923. 


b) Translation into modern German 
Bernhard Aschner, Paracelsus Simtliche Werke, nach der 10 bandi- 
gen Huserschen Gesamtausgabe (1589-1591) zum erstenmal in 
neuzeitliches Deutsch tibersetzt. Mit Einleitung, Biographie, Litera- 
turangaben und erklarenden Anmerkungen versehen. 4 Volumes. 
Jena, Verlag von Gustav Fischer, 1926, 1928, 1930, 1932. 


255 


256 THEOPHRASTUS VON HOHENHEIM 


c) English translations 

In the 16th and 17th centuries a number of alchemical and therapeutic 
treatises were translated into English. They are listed in Sudhoff’s 
Bibliography and in Bayard Q. Morgan, A Critical Bibliography of 
German Literature in English Translation, 1481-1927. Supplement 
1928 - 1935. Second edition. Stanford University, California. London, 
Oxford University Press, 1938. 


See also: Arthur Eduard Waite, The Hermetic and Alchemical Writ- 
ings of Aureolus Philippus Theophrastus Bombast, of Hohen- 
heim, called Paracelsus the Great. Vol. I. Hermetic Chemistry. 
Vol. II. Hermetic Medicine and Hermetic Philosophy. London, 
James Elliot and Co., 1894. 


3. LITERATURE ON PARACELSUS 

a) In German 

A short, but the most authoritative, biography is: Karl Sudhoff, 
Paracelsus, Ein deutsches Lebensbild aus den Tagen der Renaissance, 
Leipzig, 1936. It contains most of the documents to his life. 

The iconography of Paracelsus is described in: Carl Aberle, Grab- 
denkmal, Schidel und Abbildungen des Theophrastus Paracelsus. 
Salzburg, 1891. 


Raymund Netzhammer, Theophrastus Paracelsus, Das Wissenswer- 
taste tiber dessen Leben, Lehre und Schriften. Einsiedeln, 1901. 

R. Julius Hartman, Theophrast von Hohenheim. Stuttgart und 
Berlin, 1904. 

Joh. Daniel Achelis, Paracelsus Volumen Paramirum (Von Krank- 
heit und gesundem Leben). Jena, 1928. 

Friedrich Gundolf, Paracelsus. Berlin, 1928. 

B. S. von Waltershausen, Paracelsus am Eingang der deutschen 
Bildungsgeschichte. Leipzig, 1936. 

Franz Strunz, Theophrastus Paracelsus, Idee und Problem seiner 
Weltanschauung. Salzburg and Leipzig, 1937. 

b) In English 

Franz Hartmann, The Life of Philippus Theophrastus Bombast of 
Hohenheim, Known by the Name of Paracelsus. London, 1887. 

Anna M. Stoddart, The Life of Paracelsus, Theophrastus von Hohen- 
heim, 1493-1541. London, 1911. 

John Maxson Stillman, Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim 
Called Paracelsus, His Personality and Influence As a Physician, 
Chemist and Reformer. Chicago and London, 1920. 








ae Ro pit j ; i eli 
‘ Li ‘ 5 Wir f aia os bape Val 

re iw). » f ; J “a le \ 
b t / mr Hi ,  s : 
may : . 7 
fi ' , , 

3 & 
‘ , 
, 
‘ 
J , 
." 
. 
wn 
i 
it 
j 
i 
' . 
* 











tA 


